ABASH
A*bash", v.t. [imp. & p.p. Abashed; p.pr. & vb. n. Abashing.] Etym:
[OE. abaissen, abaisshen, abashen, OF.esbahir, F. ébahir, to
astonish, fr. L. ex + the interjection bah, expressing astonishment.
In OE. somewhat confused with abase. Cf. Finish.]

Defn: To destroy the self-possession of; to confuse or confound, as
by exciting suddenly a consciousness of guilt, mistake, or
inferiority; to put to shame; to disconcert; to discomfit.
Abashed, the devil stood, And felt how awful goodness is. Milton.
He was a man whom no check could abash. Macaulay.

Syn.
 -- To confuse; confound; disconcert; shame.
 -- To Abash, Confuse, Confound. Abash is a stronger word than
confuse, but not so strong as confound. We are abashed when struck
either with sudden shame or with a humbling sense of inferiority; as,
Peter was abashed in the presence of those who are greatly his
superiors. We are confused when, from some unexpected or startling
occurrence, we lose clearness of thought and self-possession. Thus, a
witness is often confused by a severe cross-examination; a timid
person is apt to be confused in entering a room full of strangers. We
are confounded when our minds are overwhelmed, as it were, by
something wholly unexpected, amazing, dreadful, etc., so that we have
nothing to say. Thus, a criminal is usually confounded at the
discovery of his guilt.
Satan stood Awhile as mute, confounded what to say. Milton.

ABASHEDLY
A*bash"ed*ly, adv.

Defn: In an abashed manner.

ABASHMENT
A*bash"ment, n. Etym: [Cf. F. ébahissement.]

Defn: The state of being abashed; confusion from shame.

ABASIA
A*ba"si*a, n. [NL.; Gr. - not +  a step.] (Med.)

Defn: Inability to coördinate muscular actions properly in walking. -
- A*ba"sic (#), a.

ABASSI; ABASSIS
A*bas"si, A*bas"sis, n. Etym: [Ar.& Per. abasi, belonging to Abas (a
king of Persia).]

Defn: A silver coin of Persia, worth about twenty cents.

ABATABLE
A*bat"a*ble, a.

Defn: Capable of being abated; as, an abatable writ or nuisance.

ABATE
A*bate", v.t. [imp.& p.p. Abated, p.pr. & vb.n. Abating.] Etym: [OF.
abatre to beat down, F. abattre, LL. abatere; ab or ad + batere,
battere (popular form for L. batuere to beat). Cf. Bate, Batter.]

1. To beat down; to overthrow. [Obs.]
The King of Scots . . . sore abated the walls. Edw. Hall.

2. To bring down or reduce from a higher to a lower state, number, or
degree; to lessen; to diminish; to contract; to moderate; toto cut
short; as, to abate a demand; to abate pride, zeal, hope.
His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. Deut. xxxiv. 7.

3. To deduct; to omit; as, to abate something from a price.
Nine thousand parishes, abating the odd hundreds. Fuller.

4. To blunt. [Obs.]
To abate the edge of envy. Bacon.

5. To reduce in estimation; to deprive. [Obs.]
She hath abated me of half my train. Shak.

6. (Law)

Defn: (a) To bring entirely down or put an end to; to do away with;
as, to abate a nuisance, to abate a writ. (b) (Eng. Law) To diminish;
to reduce. Legacies are liable to be abated entirely or in
proportion, upon a deficiency of assets. To abate a tax, to remit it
either wholly or in part.

ABATE
A*bate", v.i. Etym: [See Abate, v.t.]

1. To decrease, or become less in strength or violence; as, pain
abates, a storm abates.
The fury of Glengarry . . . rapidly abated. Macaulay.

2. To be defeated, or come to naught; to fall through; to fail; as, a
writ abates. To abate into a freehold, To abate in lands (Law), to
enter into a freehold after the death of the last possessor, and
before the heir takes possession. See Abatement, 4.

Syn.
 -- To subside; decrease; intermit; decline; diminish; lessen.
 -- To Abate, Subside. These words, as here compared, imply a coming
down from some previously raised or exited state. Abate expresses
this in respect to degrees, and implies a diminution of force or of
intensity; as, the storm abates, the cold abates, the force of the
wind abates; or, the wind abates, a fever abates. Subside (to settle
down) has reference to a previous state of agitation or commotion;
as, the waves subside after a storm, the wind subsides into a calm.
When the words are used figuratively, the same distinction should be
observed. If we conceive of a thing as having different degrees of
intensity or strength, the word to be used is abate. Thus we say, a
man's anger abates, the ardor of one's love abates, "Winter rage
abates". But if the image be that of a sinking down into quiet from
preceding excitement or commotion, the word to be used is subside;
as, the tumult of the people subsides, the public mind subsided into
a calm. The same is the case with those emotions which are tumultuous
in their nature; as, his passion subsides, his joy quickly subsided,
his grief subsided into a pleasing melancholy. Yet if, in such cases,
we were thinking of the degree of violence of the emotion, we might
use abate; as, his joy will abate in the progress of time; and so in
other instances.

ABATE
A*bate, n.

Defn: Abatement. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

ABATEMENT
A*bate"ment, n. Etym: [OF. abatement, F. abattement.]

1. The act of abating, or the state of being abated; a lessening,
diminution, or reduction; removal or putting an end to; as, the
abatement of a nuisance is the suppression thereof.

2. The amount abated; that which is taken away by way of reduction;
deduction; decrease; a rebate or discount allowed.

3. (Her.)

Defn: A mark of dishonor on an escutcheon.

4. (Law)

Defn: The entry of a stranger, without right, into a freehold after
the death of the last possessor, before the heir or devisee.
Blackstone. Defense in abatement, Plea in abatement, (Law), plea to
the effect that from some formal defect (e.g. misnomer, want of
jurisdiction) the proceedings should be abated.

ABATER
A*bat"er, n.

Defn: One who, or that which, abates.

ABATIS; ABATTIS
Ab"a*tis, Aba"t*tis, n. Etym: [F. abatis, abattis, mass of things
beaten or cut down, fr. abattre. See Abate.] (Fort.)

Defn: A means of defense formed by felled trees, the ends of whose
branches are sharpened and directed outwards, or against the enemy.

ABATISED
Ab"a*tised, a.

Defn: Provided with an abatis.

ABATOR
A*ba"tor, n. (Law)

Defn: (a) One who abates a nuisance. (b) A person who, without right,
enters into a freehold on the death of the last possessor, before the
heir or devisee. Blackstone.

ABATTOIR
A`bat`toir", n.; pl. Abattoirs. Etym: [F., fr. abattre to beat down.
See Abate.]

Defn: A public slaughterhouse for cattle, sheep, etc.

ABATURE
Ab"a*ture, n. Etym: [F. abatture, fr. abattre. See Abate.]

Defn: Grass and sprigs beaten or trampled down by a stag passing
through them. Crabb.

ABATVOIX
A`bat`voix", n. Etym: [F. abattre to beat down + voix voice.]

Defn: The sounding-board over a pulpit or rostrum.

ABAWED
Ab*awed", p.p. Etym: [Perh. p.p. of a verb fr. OF. abaubir to
frighten, disconcert, fr. L. ad + balbus stammering.]

Defn: Astonished; abashed. [Obs.] Chaucer.

ABAXIAL; ABAXILE
Ab*ax"i*al, Ab*ax"ile, a. Etym: [L. ab + axis axle.] (Bot.)

Defn: Away from the axis or central line; eccentric. Balfour.

ABAY
A*bay", n. Etym: [OF. abay barking.]

Defn: Barking; baying of dogs upon their prey. See Bay. [Obs.]

ABB
Abb, n. Etym: [AS. aweb, ab; pref. a- + web. See Web.]

Defn: Among weaves, yarn for the warp. Hence, abb wool is wool for
the abb.

ABBA
Ab"ba, n. Etym: [Syriac abba father. See Abbot.]

Defn: Father; religious superior; -- in the Syriac, Coptic, and
Ethiopic churches, a title given to the bishops, and by the bishops
to the patriarch.

ABBACY
Ab"ba*cy, n.; pl. Abbacies. Etym: [L. abbatia, fr. abbas, abbatis,
abbot. See Abbey.]

Defn: The dignity, estate, or jurisdiction of an abbot.

ABBATIAL
Ab*ba"tial, a. Etym: [LL. abbatialis : cf. F. abbatial.]

Defn: Belonging to an abbey; as, abbatial rights.

ABBATICAL
Ab*bat"ic*al, a.

Defn: Abbatial. [Obs.]

ABBE
Ab"bé`, n.Etym: [F. abbé. See Abbot.]

Defn: The French word answering to the English abbot, the head of an
abbey; but commonly a title of respect given in France to every one
vested with the ecclesiastical habit or dress.

Note: * After the 16th century, the name was given, in social
parlance, to candidates for some priory or abbey in the gift of the
crown. Many of these aspirants became well known in literary and
fashionable life. By further extension, the name came to be applied
to unbeneficed secular ecclesiastics generally. Littré.

ABBESS
Ab"bess, n. Etym: [OF.abaesse, abeesse, F. abbesse, L. abbatissa,
fem. of abbas, abbatis, abbot. See Abbot.]

Defn: A female superior or governess of a nunnery, or convent of
nuns, having the same authority over the nuns which the abbots have
over the monks. See Abbey.

ABBEY
Ab"bey, n.; pl. Abbeys. Etym: [OF. abaïe, F. abbaye, L. abbatia, fr.
abbas abbot. See Abbot.]

1. A monastery or society of persons of either sex, secluded from the
world and devoted to religion and celibacy; also, the monastic
building or buildings.

Note: The men are called monks, and governed by an abbot; the women
are called nuns, and governed by an abbess.

2. The church of a monastery.

Note: In London, the Abbey means Westminster Abbey, and in Scotland,
the precincts of the Abbey of Holyrood. The name is also retained for
a private residence on the site of an abbey; as, Newstead Abbey, the
residence of Lord Byron.

Syn.
 -- Monastery; convent; nunnery; priory; cloister. See Cloister.

ABBOT
Ab"bot, n. Etym: [AS. abbod, abbad, L. abbas, abbatis, Gr. abba
father. Cf. Abba, AbbÉ.]

1. The superior or head of an abbey.

2. One of a class of bishops whose sees were formerly abbeys. Encyc.
Brit. Abbot of the people. a title formerly given to one of the chief
magistrates in Genoa.
 -- Abbot of Misrule (or Lord of Misrule), in mediæval times, the
master of revels, as at Christmas; in Scotland called the Abbot of
Unreason. Encyc. Brit.

ABBOTSHIP
Ab"bot*ship, n. Etym: [Abbot + -ship.]

Defn: The state or office of an abbot.

ABBREVIATE
Ab*bre"vi*ate, v.t. [imp. & p.p. Abbreviated; p.pr. & vb.n.
Abbreviating.] Etym: [L. abbreviatus, p.p. of abbreviare; ad +
breviare to shorten, fr. brevis short. See Abridge.]

1. To make briefer; to shorten; to abridge; to reduce by contraction
or omission, especially of words written or spoken.
It is one thing to abbreviate by contracting, another by cutting off.
Bacon.

2. (Math.)

Defn: To reduce to lower terms, as a fraction.

ABBREVIATE
Ab*bre"vi*ate, a. Etym: [L. abbreviatus, p.p.]

1. Abbreviated; abridged; shortened. [R.] "The abbreviate form."
Earle.

2. (Biol.)

Defn: Having one part relatively shorter than another or than the
ordinary type.

ABBREVIATE
Ab*bre"vi*ate, n.

Defn: An abridgment. [Obs.] Elyot.

ABBREVIATED
Ab*bre"vi*a`ted, a.

Defn: Shortened; relatively short; abbreviate.

ABBREVIATION
Ab*bre`vi*a"tion, n. Etym: [LL. abbreviatio: cf. F. abbréviation.]

1. The act of shortening, or reducing.

2. The result of abbreviating; an abridgment. Tylor.

3. The form to which a word or phrase is reduced by contraction and
omission; a letter or letters, standing for a word or phrase of which
they are a part; as, Gen. for Genesis; U.S.A. for United States of
America.

4. (Mus.)

Defn: One dash, or more, through the stem of a note, dividing it
respectively into quavers, semiquavers, or demi-semiquavers. Moore.

ABBREVIATOR
Ab*bre"vi*a`tor, n. Etym: [LL.: cf. F. abbréviateur.]

1. One who abbreviates or shortens.

2. One of a college of seventy-two officers of the papal court whose
duty is to make a short minute of a decision on a petition, or reply
of the pope to a letter, and afterwards expand the minute into
official form.

ABBREVIATORY
Ab*bre"vi*a*to*ry, a.

Defn: Serving or tending to abbreviate; shortening; abridging.

ABBREVIATURE
Ab*bre"vi*a*ture, n.

1. An abbreviation; an abbreviated state or form. [Obs.]

2. An abridgment; a compendium or abstract.
This is an excellent abbreviature of the whole duty of a Christian.
Jer. Taylor.

ABB WOOL
Abb" wool.

Defn: See Abb.

A B C
A B C".

1. The first three letters of the alphabet, used for the whole
alphabet.

2. A primer for teaching the alphabet and first elements of reading.
[Obs.]

3. The simplest rudiments of any subject; as, the A B C of finance. A
B C book, a primer. Shak.

ABDAL
Ab"dal, n. Etym: [Ar. badil, pl. abdal, a substitute, a good,
religious man, saint, fr. badala to change, substitute.]

Defn: A religious devotee or dervish in Persia.

ABDERIAN
Ab*de"ri*an, a. Etym: [From Abdera, a town in Thrace, of which place
Democritus, the Laughing Philosopher, was a native.]

Defn: Given to laughter; inclined to foolish or incessant merriment.

ABDERITE
Ab*de"rite, n. Etym: [L. Abderita, Abderites, fr. Gr. '

Defn: An inhabitant of Abdera, in Thrace. The Abderite, Democritus,
the Laughing Philosopher.

ABDEST
Ab"dest, n. Etym: [Per. abdast; ab water + dast hand.]

Defn: Purification by washing the hands before prayer; -- a
Mohammedan rite. Heyse.

ABDICABLE
Ab"di*ca*ble, a.

Defn: Capable of being abdicated.

ABDICANT
Ab"di*cant, a. Etym: [L. abdicans, p.pr. of abdicare.]

Defn: Abdicating; renouncing; -- followed by of.
Monks abdicant of their orders. Whitlock.

ABDICANT
Ab"di*cant, n.

Defn: One who abdicates. Smart.

ABDICATE
Ab"di*cate, v.t. [imp. & p.p. Abdicated; p.pr. & vb.n. Abdicating.]
Etym: [L. abdicatus, p.p. of abdicare; ab + dicare to proclaim, akin
to dicere to say. See Diction.]

1. To surrender or relinquish, as sovereign power; to withdraw
definitely from filling or exercising, as a high office, station,
dignity; as, to abdicate the throne, the crown, the papacy.

Note: The word abdicate was held to mean, in the case of James II.,
to abandon without a formal surrender.
The cross-bearers abdicated their service. Gibbon.

2. To renounce; to relinquish; -- said of authority, a trust, duty,
right, etc.
He abdicates all right to be his own governor. Burke.
The understanding abdicates its functions. Froude.

3. To reject; to cast off. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

4. (Civil Law)

Defn: To disclaim and expel from the family, as a father his child;
to disown; to disinherit.

Syn.
 -- To give up; quit; vacate; relinquish; forsake; abandon; resign;
renounce; desert.
 -- To Abdicate, Resign. Abdicate commonly expresses the act of a
monarch in voluntary and formally yielding up sovereign authority;
as, to abdicate the government. Resign is applied to the act of any
person, high or low, who gives back an office or trust into the hands
of him who conferred it. Thus, a minister resigns, a military officer
resigns, a clerk resigns. The expression, "The king resigned his
crown," sometimes occurs in our later literature, implying that he
held it from his people.
 -- There are other senses of resign which are not here brought into
view.

ABDICATE
Ab"di*cate, v.i.

Defn: To relinquish or renounce a throne, or other high office or
dignity.
Though a king may abdicate for his own person, he cannot abdicate for
the monarchy. Burke.

ABDICATION
Ab`di*ca"tion, n. Etym: [L. abdicatio: cf. F. abdication.]

Defn: The act of abdicating; the renunciation of a high office,
dignity, or trust, by its holder; commonly the voluntary renunciation
of sovereign power; as, abdication of the throne, government, power,
authority.

ABDICATIVE
Ab"di*ca*tive, a. Etym: [L. abdicativus.]

Defn: Causing, or implying, abdication. [R.] Bailey.

ABDICATOR
Ab"di*ca`tor, n.

Defn: One who abdicates.

ABDITIVE
Ab"di*tive, a. Etym: [L. abditivus, fr. abdere to hide.]

Defn: Having the quality of hiding. [R.] Bailey.

ABDITORY
Ab"di*to*ry, n. Etym: [L. abditorium.]

Defn: A place for hiding or preserving articles of value. Cowell.

ABDOMEN
Ab*do"men, n. Etym: [L. abdomen (a word of uncertain etymol.): cf. F.
abdomen.]

1. (Anat.)

Defn: The belly, or that part of the body between the thorax and the
pelvis. Also, the cavity of the belly, which is lined by the
peritoneum, and contains the stomach, bowels, and other viscera. In
man, often restricted to the part between the diaphragm and the
commencement of the pelvis, the remainder being called the pelvic
cavity.

2. (Zoöl.)

Defn: The posterior section of the body, behind the thorax, in
insects, crustaceans, and other Arthropoda.

ABDOMINAL
Ab*dom"i*nal, a. Etym: [Cf. F. abdominal.]

1. Of or pertaining to the abdomen; ventral; as, the abdominal
regions, muscles, cavity.

2. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Having abdominal fins; belonging to the Abdominales; as,
abdominal fishes. Abdominal ring (Anat.), a fancied ringlike opening
on each side of the abdomen, external and superior to the pubes; --
called also inguinal ring.

ABDOMINAL
Ab*dom"i*nal, n.; E. pl. Abdominals, L. pl. Abdominales.

Defn: A fish of the group Abdominales.

ABDOMINALES
Ab*dom`i*na"les, n. pl. Etym: [NL., masc. pl.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A group including the greater part of fresh-water fishes, and
many marine ones, having the ventral fins under the abdomen behind
the pectorals.

ABDOMINALIA
Ab*dom`i*na"li*a, n. pl. Etym: [NL., neut. pl.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A group of cirripeds having abdominal appendages.

ABDOMINOSCOPY
Ab*dom`i*nos"co*py, n. Etym: [L. abdomen + Gr. (Med.)

Defn: Examination of the abdomen to detect abdominal disease.

ABDOMINOTHORACIC
Ab*dom`i*no*tho*rac"ic, a.

Defn: Relating to the abdomen and the thorax, or chest.

ABDOMINOUS
Ab*dom"i*nous, a.

Defn: Having a protuberant belly; pot-bellied.
Gorgonius sits, abdominous and wan, Like a fat squab upon a Chinese
fan. Cowper.

ABDUCE
Ab*duce", v.t. [imp. & p.p. Abduced; p.pr. & vb.n. Abducing.] Etym:
[L. abducere to lead away; ab + ducere to lead. See Duke, and cf.
Abduct.]

Defn: To draw or conduct away; to withdraw; to draw to a different
part. [Obs.]
If we abduce the eye unto either corner, the object will not
duplicate. Sir T. Browne.

ABDUCT
Ab*duct", v.t. [imp. & p.p. Abducted; p.pr. & vb.n. Abducting.] Etym:
[L. abductus, p.p. of abducere. See Abduce.]

1. To take away surreptitiously by force; to carry away (a human
being) wrongfully and usually by violence; to kidnap.

2. To draw away, as a limb or other part, from its ordinary position.

ABDUCTION
Ab*duc"tion, n. Etym: [L. abductio: cf. F. abduction.]

1. The act of abducing or abducting; a drawing apart; a carrying
away. Roget.

2. (Physiol.)

Defn: The movement which separates a limb or other part from the
axis, or middle line, of the body.

3. (Law)

Defn: The wrongful, and usually the forcible, carrying off of a human
being; as, the abduction of a child, the abduction of an heiress.

4. (Logic)

Defn: A syllogism or form of argument in which the major is evident,
but the minor is only probable.

ABDUCTOR
Ab*duc"tor, n. Etym: [NL.]

1. One who abducts.

2. (Anat.)

Defn: A muscle which serves to draw a part out, or form the median
line of the body; as, the abductor oculi, which draws the eye
outward.

ABEAM
A*beam", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + beam.] (Naut.)

Defn: On the beam, that is, on a line which forms a right angle with
the ship's keel; opposite to the center of the ship's side.

ABEAR
A*bear", v.t. Etym: [AS. aberan; pref. a- + beran to bear.]

1. To bear; to behave. [Obs.]
So did the faery knight himself abear. Spenser.

2. To put up with; to endure. [Prov.] Dickens.

ABEARANCE
A*bear"ance, n.

Defn: Behavior. [Obs.] Blackstone.

ABEARING
A*bear"ing, n.

Defn: Behavior. [Obs.] Sir. T. More.

ABECEDARIAN
A`be*ce*da"ri*an, n. Etym: [L. abecedarius. A word from the first
four letters of the alphabet.]

1. One who is learning the alphabet; hence, a tyro.

2. One engaged in teaching the alphabet. Wood.

ABECEDARIAN; ABECEDARY
A`be*ce*da"ri*an, A`be*ce"da*ry, a.

Defn: Pertaining to, or formed by, the letters of the alphabet;
alphabetic; hence, rudimentary. Abecedarian psalms, hymns, etc.,
compositions in which (like the 119th psalm in Hebrew) distinct
portions or verses commence with successive letters of the alphabet.
Hook.

ABECEDARY
A`be*ce"da*ry, n.

Defn: A primer; the first principle or rudiment of anything. [R.]
Fuller.

ABED
A*bed", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- in, on + bed.]

1. In bed, or on the bed.
Not to be abed after midnight. Shak.

2. To childbed (in the phrase "brought abed," that is, delivered of a
child). Shak.

ABEGGE
A*beg"ge.

Defn: Same as Aby. [Obs.] Chaucer.

ABELE
A*bele", n. Etym: [D. abeel (abeel-boom), OF. abel, aubel, fr. a dim.
of L. albus white.]

Defn: The white polar (Populus alba).
Six abeles i' the churchyard grow. Mrs. Browning.

ABELIAN; ABELITE; ABELONIAN
A*bel"i*an, A"bel*ite, A`bel*o"ni*an, n. (Eccl. Hist.)

Defn: One of a sect in Africa (4th century), mentioned by St.
Augustine, who states that they married, but lived in continence,
after the manner, as they pretended, of Abel.

ABELMOSK
A"bel*mosk`, n. Etym: [NL. abelmoschus, fr. Ar. abu-l-misk father of
musk, i.e., producing musk. See Musk.] (Bot.)

Defn: An evergreen shrub (Hibiscus -- formerly Abelmoschus-
moschatus), of the East and West Indies and Northern Africa, whose
musky seeds are used in perfumery and to flavor coffee; -- sometimes
called musk mallow.

ABER-DE-VINE
Ab`er-de-vine", n. (Zoöl.)

Defn: The European siskin (Carduelis spinus), a small green and
yellow finch, related to the goldfinch.

ABERR
Ab*err", v.i. Etym: [L. aberrare. See Aberrate.]

Defn: To wander; to stray. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

ABERRANCE; ABERRANCY
Ab*er"rance, Ab*er"ran*cy, n.

Defn: State of being aberrant; a wandering from the right way;
deviation from truth, rectitude, etc. Aberrancy of curvature (Geom.),
the deviation of a curve from a circular form.

ABERRANT
Ab*er"rant, a. Etym: [L. aberrans, -rantis, p.pr. of aberrare.]

Defn: See Aberr.]

1. Wandering; straying from the right way.

2. (Biol.)

Defn: Deviating from the ordinary or natural type; exceptional;
abnormal.
The more aberrant any form is, the greater must have been the number
of connecting forms which, on my theory, have been exterminated.
Darwin.

ABERRATE
Ab"er*rate, v.i. Etym: [L. aberratus, p.pr. of aberrare; ab + errare
to wander. See Err.]

Defn: To go astray; to diverge. [R.]
Their own defective and aberrating vision. De Quincey.

ABERRATION
Ab`er*ra"tion, n. Etym: [L. aberratio: cf. F. aberration. See
Aberrate.]

1. The act of wandering; deviation, especially from truth or moral
rectitude, from the natural state, or from a type. "The aberration of
youth." Hall. "Aberrations from theory." Burke.

2. A partial alienation of reason. "Occasional aberrations of
intellect." Lingard.
Whims, which at first are the aberrations of a single brain, pass
with heat into epidemic form. I. Taylor.

3. (Astron.)

Defn: A small periodical change of position in the stars and other
heavenly bodies, due to the combined effect of the motion of light
and the motion of the observer; called annual aberration, when the
observer's motion is that of the earth in its orbit, and dairy or
diurnal aberration, when of the earth on its axis; amounting when
greatest, in the former case, to 20.4'', and in the latter, to 0.3''.
Planetary aberration is that due to the motion of light and the
motion of the planet relative to the earth.

4. (Opt.)

Defn: The convergence to different foci, by a lens or mirror, of rays
of light emanating from one and the same point, or the deviation of
such rays from a single focus; called spherical aberration, when due
to the spherical form of the lens or mirror, such form giving
different foci for central and marginal rays; and chromatic
aberration, when due to different refrangibilities of the colored
rays of the spectrum, those of each color having a distinct focus.

5. (Physiol.)

Defn: The passage of blood or other fluid into parts not appropriate
for it.

6. (Law)

Defn: The producing of an unintended effect by the glancing of an
instrument, as when a shot intended for A glances and strikes B.

Syn.
 -- Insanity; lunacy; madness; derangement; alienation; mania;
dementia; hallucination; illusion; delusion. See Insanity.

ABERRATIONAL
Ab`er*ra"tion*al, a.

Defn: Characterized by aberration.

ABERUNCATE
Ab`e*run"cate, v.t. Etym: [L. aberuncare, for aberruncare. See
Averruncate.]

Defn: To weed out. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABERUNCATOR
Ab`e*run"ca*tor, n.

Defn: A weeding machine.

ABET
A*bet", v.t. [imp. & p.p. Abetted; p.pr. & vb.n. Abetting.] Etym:
[OF. abeter; a (L. ad) + beter to bait (as a bear), fr. Icel. beita
to set dogs on, to feed, originally, to cause to bite, fr. Icel. bita
to bite, hence to bait, to incite. See Bait, Bet.]

1. To instigate or encourage by aid or countenance; -- used in a bad
sense of persons and acts; as, to abet an ill-doer; to abet one in
his wicked courses; to abet vice; to abet an insurrection. "The whole
tribe abets the villany." South.
Would not the fool abet the stealth, Who rashly thus exposed his
wealth Gay.

2. To support, uphold, or aid; to maintain; -- in a good sense.
[Obs.].
Our duty is urged, and our confidence abetted. Jer. Taylor.

3. (Law)

Defn: To contribute, as an assistant or instigator, to the commission
of an offense.

Syn.
 -- To incite; instigate; set on; egg on; foment; advocate;
countenance; encourage; second; uphold; aid; assist; support;
sustain; back; connive at.

ABET
A*bet", n. Etym: [OF. abet, fr. abeter.]

Defn: Act of abetting; aid. [Obs.] Chaucer.

ABETMENT
A*bet"ment, n.

Defn: The act of abetting; as, an abetment of treason, crime, etc.

ABETTAL
A*bet"tal, n.

Defn: Abetment. [R.]

ABETTER; ABETTOR
A*bet"ter, A*bet*tor, n.

Defn: One who abets; an instigator of an offense or an offender.

Note: The form abettor is the legal term and also in general use.

Syn.
 -- Abettor, Accessory, Accomplice. These words denote different
degrees of complicity in some deed or crime. An abettor is one who
incites or encourages to the act, without sharing in its performance.
An accessory supposes a principal offender. One who is neither the
chief actor in an offense, nor present at its performance, but
accedes to or becomes involved in its guilt, either by some previous
or subsequent act, as of instigating, encouraging, aiding, or
concealing, etc., is an accessory. An accomplice is one who
participates in the commission of an offense, whether as principal or
accessory. Thus in treason, there are no abettors or accessories, but
all are held to be principals or accomplices.

ABEVACUATION
Ab`e*vac"u*a"tion, n. Etym: [Pref. ab- + evacuation.] (Med.)

Defn: A partial evacuation. Mayne.

ABEYANCE
A*bey"ance, n. Etym: [OF. abeance expectation, longing; a (L. ad) +
baer, beer, to gape, to look with open mouth, to expect, F. bayer,
LL. badare to gape.]

1. (Law)

Defn: Expectancy; condition of being undetermined.

Note: When there is no person in existence in whom an inheritance (or
a dignity) can vest, it is said to be in abeyance, that is, in
expectation; the law considering it as always potentially existing,
and ready to vest whenever a proper owner appears. Blackstone.

2. Suspension; temporary suppression.
Keeping the sympathies of love and admiration in a dormant state, or
state of abeyance. De Quincey.

ABEYANCY
A*bey"an*cy, n.

Defn: Abeyance. [R.] Hawthorne.

ABEYANT
A*bey"ant, a.

Defn: Being in a state of abeyance.

ABGEORDNETENHAUS
Ab"ge*ord`ne*ten*haus`, n.  [G.]

Defn: See Legislature, Austria, Prussia.

ABHAL
Ab"hal, n.

Defn: The berries of a species of cypress in the East Indies.

ABHOMINABLE
Ab*hom"i*na*ble, a.

Defn: Abominable.

Note: [A false orthography anciently used; h was foisted into various
words; hence abholish, for abolish, etc.]
This is abhominable, which he [Don Armado] would call abominable.
Shak. Love's Labor's Lost, v. 1.

ABHOMINAL
Ab*hom`i*nal, a. Etym: [L. ab away from + homo, hominis, man.]

Defn: Inhuman. [Obs.] Fuller.

ABHOR
Ab*hor", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abhorred; p. pr. & vb. n. Abhorring.]
Etym: [L. abhorrere; ab + horrere to bristle, shiver, shudder: cf. F.
abhorrer. See Horrid.]

1. To shrink back with shuddering from; to regard with horror or
detestation; to feel excessive repugnance toward; to detest to
extremity; to loathe.
Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good. Rom. xii. 9.

2. To fill with horror or disgust. [Obs.]
It doth abhor me now I speak the word. Shak.

3. (Canon Law)

Defn: To protest against; to reject solemnly. [Obs.]
I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul Refuse you for my judge. Shak.

Syn.
 -- To hate; detest; loathe; abominate. See Hate.

ABHOR
Ab*hor", v. i.

Defn: To shrink back with horror, disgust, or dislike; to be contrary
or averse; -- with from. [Obs.] "To abhor from those vices." Udall.
Which is utterly abhorring from the end of all law. Milton.

ABHORRENCE
Ab*hor"rence, n.

Defn: Extreme hatred or detestation; the feeling of utter dislike.

ABHORRENCY
Ab*hor"ren*cy, n.

Defn: Abhorrence. [Obs.] Locke.

ABHORRENT
Ab*hor"rent, a. Etym: [L. abhorens, -rentis, p. pr. of abhorrere.]

1. Abhorring; detesting; having or showing abhorrence; loathing;
hence, strongly opposed to; as, abhorrent thoughts.
The persons most abhorrent from blood and treason. Burke.
The arts of pleasure in despotic courts I spurn abhorrent. Clover.

2. Contrary or repugnant; discordant; inconsistent; -- followed by
to. "Injudicious profanation, so abhorrent to our stricter
principles." Gibbon.

3. Detestable. "Pride, abhorrent as it is." I. Taylor.

ABHORRENTLY
Ab*hor"rent*ly, adv.

Defn: With abhorrence.

ABHORRER
Ab*hor"rer, n.

Defn: One who abhors. Hume.

ABHORRIBLE
Ab*hor"ri*ble, a.

Defn: Detestable. [R.]

ABHORRING
Ab*hor"ring, n.

1. Detestation. Milton.

2. Object of abhorrence. Isa. lxvi. 24.

ABIB
A"bib, n. Etym: [Heb. abib, lit. an ear of corn. The month was so
called from barley being at that time in ear.]

Defn: The first month of the Jewish ecclesiastical year,
corresponding nearly to our April. After the Babylonish captivity
this month was called Nisan. Kitto.

ABIDANCE
A*bid"ance, n.

Defn: The state of abiding; abode; continuance; compliance (with).
The Christians had no longer abidance in the holy hill of Palestine.
Fuller.
A judicious abidance by rules. Helps.

ABIDE
A*bide", v. i. [imp. & p. p. Abode, formerly Abid(#); p. pr. & vb. n.
Abiding.] Etym: [AS. abidan; pref. a- (cf. Goth. us-, G. er-, orig.
meaning out) + bidan to bide. See Bide.]

1. To wait; to pause; to delay. [Obs.] Chaucer.

2. To stay; to continue in a place; to have one's abode; to dwell; to
sojourn; -- with with before a person, and commonly with at or in
before a place.
Let the damsel abide with us a few days. Gen. xxiv. 55.

3. To remain stable or fixed in some state or condition; to continue;
to remain.
Let every man abide in the same calling. 1 Cor. vii. 20.
Followed by by: To abide by. (a) To stand to; to adhere; to maintain.
The poor fellow was obstinate enough to abide by what he said at
first. Fielding.
(b) To acquiesce; to conform to; as, to abide by a decision or an
award.

ABIDE
A*bide", v. t.

1. To wait for; to be prepared for; to await; to watch for; as, I
abide my time. "I will abide the coming of my lord." Tennyson.

Note: [[Obs.], with a personal object.
Bonds and afflictions abide me. Acts xx. 23.

2. To endure; to sustain; to submit to.
[Thou] shalt abide her judgment on it. Tennyson.

3. To bear patiently; to tolerate; to put up with.
She could not abide Master Shallow. Shak.

4.

Note: [Confused with aby to pay for. See Aby.]

Defn: To stand the consequences of; to answer for; to suffer for.
Dearly I abide that boast so vain. Milton.

ABIDER
A*bid"er, n.

1. One who abides, or continues. [Obs.] "Speedy goers and strong
abiders." Sidney.

2. One who dwells; a resident. Speed.

ABIDING
A*bid"ing, a.

Defn: Continuing; lasting.

ABIDINGLY
A*bid"ing*ly, adv.

Defn: Permanently. Carlyle.

ABIES
A"bi*es, n. Etym: [L., fir tree.] (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of coniferous trees, properly called Fir, as the balsam
fir and the silver fir. The spruces are sometimes also referred to
this genus.

ABIETENE
Ab"i*e*tene, n. Etym: [L. abies, abietis, a fir tree.]

Defn: A volatile oil distilled from the resin or balsam of the nut
pine (Pinus sabiniana) of California.

ABIETIC
Ab`i*et"ic, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to the fir tree or its products; as, abietic
acid, called also sylvic acid. Watts.

ABIETIN; ABIETINE
Ab"i*e*tin, Ab"i*e*tine, n. Etym: [See Abietene.] (Chem.)

Defn: A resinous obtained from Strasburg turpentine or Canada balsam.
It is without taste or smell, is insoluble in water, but soluble in
alcohol (especially at the boiling point), in strong acetic acid, and
in ether. Watts.

ABIETINIC
Ab`i*e*tin"ic, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to abietin; as, abietinic acid.

ABIETITE
Ab"i*e*tite, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A substance resembling mannite, found in the needles of the
common silver fir of Europe (Abies pectinata). Eng. Cyc.

ABIGAIL
Ab"i*gail, n. Etym: [The proper name used as an appellative.]

Defn: A lady's waiting-maid. Pepys.
Her abigail reported that Mrs. Gutheridge had a set of night curls
for sleeping in. Leslie.

ABILIMENT
A*bil"i*ment, n.

Defn: Habiliment. [Obs.]

ABILITY
A*bil"i*ty, n.; pl. Abilities(#). Etym: [F. habileté, earlier
spelling habilité (with silent h), L. habilitas aptitude, ability,
fr. habilis apt. See Able.]

Defn: The quality or state of being able; power to perform, whether
physical, moral, intellectual, conventional, or legal; capacity;
skill or competence in doing; sufficiency of strength, skill,
resources, etc.; -- in the plural, faculty, talent.
Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to
send relief unto the brethren. Acts xi. 29.
Natural abilities are like natural plants, that need pruning by
study. Bacon.
The public men of England, with much of a peculiar kind of ability.
Macaulay.

Syn.
 -- Capacity; talent; cleverness; faculty; capability; efficiency;
aptitude; aptness; address; dexterity; skill. Ability, Capacity.
These words come into comparison when applied to the higher
intellectual powers. Ability has reference to the active exercise of
our faculties. It implies not only native vigor of mind, but that
ease and promptitude of execution which arise from mental training.
Thus, we speak of the ability with which a book is written, an
argument maintained, a negotiation carried on, etc. It always
something to be done, and the power of doing it. Capacity has
reference to the receptive powers. In its higher exercises it
supposes great quickness of apprehension and breadth of intellect,
with an uncommon aptitude for acquiring and retaining knowledge.
Hence it carries with it the idea of resources and undeveloped power.
Thus we speak of the extraordinary capacity of such men as Lord
Bacon, Blaise Pascal, and Edmund Burke. "Capacity," says H. Taylor,
"is requisite to devise, and ability to execute, a great enterprise."
The word abilities, in the plural, embraces both these qualities, and
denotes high mental endowments.

ABIME; ABYME
A*bime" or A*byme", n. Etym: [F. abîme. See Abysm.]

Defn: A abyss. [Obs.]

ABIOGENESIS
Ab`i*o*gen"e*sis, n. Etym: [Gr. (Biol.)

Defn: The supposed origination of living organisms from lifeless
matter; such genesis as does not involve the action of living
parents; spontaneous generation; -- called also abiogeny, and opposed
to biogenesis.
I shall call the . . . doctrine that living matter may be produced by
not living matter, the hypothesis of abiogenesis. Huxley, 1870.

ABIOGENETIC
Ab`i*o*ge*net"ic, a. (Biol.)

Defn: Of or pertaining to abiogenesis. Ab`i*o*ge*net"ic*al*ly, adv.

ABIOGENIST
Ab`i*og"e*nist, n. (Biol.)

Defn: One who believes that life can be produced independently of
antecedent. Huxley.

ABIOGENOUS
Ab`i*og"e*nous, a. (Biol.)

Defn: Produced by spontaneous generation.

ABIOGENY
Ab`i*og"e*ny, n. (Biol.)

Defn: Same as Abiogenesis.

ABIOLOGICAL
Ab`i*o*log"ic*al, a. Etym: [Gr. biological.]

Defn: Pertaining to the study of inanimate things.

ABIRRITANT
Ab*ir"ri*tant, n. (Med.)

Defn: A medicine that diminishes irritation.

ABIRRITATE
Ab*ir"ri*tate, v. t. Etym: [Pref. ab- + irritate.] (Med.)

Defn: To diminish the sensibility of; to debilitate.

ABIRRITATION
Ab*ir`ri*ta"tion, n. (Med.)

Defn: A pathological condition opposite to that of irritation;
debility; want of strength; asthenia.

ABIRRITATIVE
Ab*ir"ri*ta*tive, a. (Med.)

Defn: Characterized by abirritation or debility.

ABIT
A*bit",

Defn: 3d sing. pres. of Abide. [Obs.] Chaucer.

ABJECT
Ab"ject, a. Etym: [L. abjectus, p. p. of abjicere to throw away; ab +
jacere to throw. See Jet a shooting forth.]

1. Cast down; low-lying. [Obs.]
From the safe shore their floating carcasses And broken chariot
wheels; so thick bestrown Abject and lost lay these, covering the
flood. Milton.

2. Sunk to a law condition; down in spirit or hope; degraded;
servile; groveling; despicable; as, abject posture, fortune,
thoughts. "Base and abject flatterers." Addison. "An abject liar."
Macaulay.
And banish hence these abject, lowly dreams. Shak.

Syn.
 -- Mean; groveling; cringing; mean-spirited; slavish; ignoble;
worthless; vile; beggarly; contemptible; degraded.

ABJECT
Ab*ject", v. t. Etym: [From Abject, a.]

Defn: To cast off or down; hence, to abase; to degrade; to lower; to
debase. [Obs.] Donne.

ABJECT
Ab"ject, n.

Defn: A person in the lowest and most despicable condition; a
castaway. [Obs.]
Shall these abjects, these victims, these outcasts, know any thing of
pleasure I. Taylor.

ABJECTEDNESS
Ab*ject"ed*ness, n.

Defn: A very abject or low condition; abjectness. [R.] Boyle.

ABJECTION
Ab*jec"tion, n. Etym: [F. abjection, L. abjectio.]

1. The act of bringing down or humbling. "The abjection of the king
and his realm." Joe.

2. The state of being rejected or cast out. [R.]
An adjection from the beatific regions where God, and his angels and
saints, dwell forever. Jer. Taylor.

3. A low or downcast state; meanness of spirit; abasement;
degradation.
That this should be termed baseness, abjection of mind, or servility,
is it credible Hooker.

ABJECTLY
Ab"ject*ly, adv.

Defn: Meanly; servilely.

ABJECTNESS
Ab"ject*ness, n.

Defn: The state of being abject; abasement; meanness; servility.
Grew.

ABJUDGE
Ab*judge", v. t. Etym: [Pref. ab- + judge, v. Cf. Abjudicate.]

Defn: To take away by judicial decision. [R.]

ABJUDICATE
Ab*ju"di*cate, v. t. Etym: [L. abjudicatus, p. p. of abjudicare; ab +
judicare. See Judge, and cf. Abjudge.]

Defn: To reject by judicial sentence; also, to abjudge. [Obs.] Ash.

ABJUDICATION
Ab*ju`di*ca"tion, n.

Defn: Rejection by judicial sentence. [R.] Knowles.

ABJUGATE
Ab"ju*gate, v. t. Etym: [L. abjugatus, p. p. of abjugare.]

Defn: To unyoke. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABJUNCTIVE
Ab*junc"tive, a. Etym: [L. abjunctus, p. p. of abjungere; ab +
jungere to join.]

Defn: Exceptional. [R.]
It is this power which leads on from the accidental and abjunctive to
the universal. I. Taylor.

ABJURATION
Ab`ju*ra"tion, n. Etym: [L. abjuratio: cf. F. abjuration.]

1. The act of abjuring or forswearing; a renunciation upon oath; as,
abjuration of the realm, a sworn banishment, an oath taken to leave
the country and never to return.

2. A solemn recantation or renunciation; as, an abjuration of heresy.
Oath of abjuration, an oath asserting the right of the present royal
family to the crown of England, and expressly abjuring allegiance to
the descendants of the Pretender. Brande & C.

ABJURATORY
Ab*ju"ra*to*ry, a.

Defn: Containing abjuration.

ABJURE
Ab*jure", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abjured; p. pr. & vb. n. Abjuring.]
Etym: [L. abjurare to deny upon oath; ab + jurare to swear, fr. jus,
juris, right, law; cf. F. abjurer. See Jury.]

1. To renounce upon oath; to forswear; to disavow; as, to abjure
allegiance to a prince. To abjure the realm, is to swear to abandon
it forever.

2. To renounce or reject with solemnity; to recant; to abandon
forever; to reject; repudiate; as, to abjure errors. "Magic I here
abjure." Shak.

Syn.
 -- See Renounce.

ABJURE
Ab*jure", v. i.

Defn: To renounce on oath. Bp. Burnet.

ABJUREMENT
Ab*jure"ment, n.

Defn: Renunciation. [R.]

ABJURER
Ab*jur"er, n.

Defn: One who abjures.

ABLACTATE
Ab*lac"tate, v. t. Etym: [L. ablactatus, p. p. of ablactare; ab +
lactare to suckle, fr. lac milk.]

Defn: To wean. [R.] Bailey.

ABLACTATION
Ab`lac*ta"tion. n.

1. The weaning of a child from the breast, or of young beasts from
their dam. Blount.

2. (Hort.)

Defn: The process of grafting now called inarching, or grafting by
approach.

ABLAQUEATE
Ab*la"que*ate, v. t. Etym: [L. ablaqueatus, p. p. of. ablaqueare; fr.
ab + laqueus a noose.]

Defn: To lay bare, as the roots of a tree. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABLAQUEATION
Ab*la`que*a"tion, n. Etym: [L. ablaqueatio.]

Defn: The act or process of laying bare the roots of trees to expose
them to the air and water. [Obs.] Evelyn.

ABLASTEMIC
Ab`las*tem"ic, a. Etym: [Gr. (Biol.)

Defn: Non-germinal.

ABLATION
Ab*la"tion, n. Etym: [L. ablatio, fr. ablatus p. p. of auferre to
carry away; ab + latus, p. p. of ferre carry: cf. F. ablation. See
Tolerate.]

1. A carrying or taking away; removal. Jer. Taylor.

2. (Med.)

Defn: Extirpation. Dunglison.

3. (Geol.)

Defn: Wearing away; superficial waste. Tyndall.

ABLATITIOUS
Ab`la*ti"tious, a.

Defn: Diminishing; as, an ablatitious force. Sir J. Herschel.

ABLATIVE
Ab"la*tive, a. Etym: [F. ablatif, ablative, L. ablativus fr. ablatus.
See Ablation.]

1. Taking away or removing. [Obs.]
Where the heart is forestalled with misopinion, ablative directions
are found needful to unteach error, ere we can learn truth. Bp. Hall.

2. (Gram.)

Defn: Applied to one of the cases of the noun in Latin and some other
languages, -- the fundamental meaning of the case being removal,
separation, or taking away.

ABLATIVE
Ab"la*tive, (Gram.)

Defn: The ablative case. ablative absolute, a construction in Latin,
in which a noun in the ablative case has a participle (either
expressed or implied), agreeing with it in gender, number, and case,
both words forming a clause by themselves and being unconnected,
grammatically, with the rest of the sentence; as, Tarquinio regnante,
Pythagoras venit, i. e., Tarquinius reigning, Pythagoras came.

ABLAUT
Ab"laut, n. Etym: [Ger., off-sound; ab off + laut sound.] (Philol.)

Defn: The substitution of one root vowel for another, thus indicating
a corresponding modification of use or meaning; vowel permutation;
as, get, gat, got; sing, song; hang, hung. Earle.

ABLAZE
A*blaze", adv. & a. Etym: [Pref. a- + blaze.]

1. On fire; in a blaze, gleaming. Milman.
All ablaze with crimson and gold. Longfellow.

2. In a state of glowing excitement or ardent desire.
The young Cambridge democrats were all ablaze to assist Torrijos.
Carlyle.

ABLE
A"ble, a. [Comp. Abler; superl. Ablest.] Etym: [OF. habile, L.
habilis that may be easily held or managed, apt, skillful, fr. habere
to have, hold. Cf. Habile and see Habit.]

1. Fit; adapted; suitable. [Obs.]
A many man, to ben an abbot able. Chaucer.

2. Having sufficient power, strength, force, skill, means, or
resources of any kind to accomplish the object; possessed of
qualifications rendering competent for some end; competent;
qualified; capable; as, an able workman, soldier, seaman, a man able
to work; a mind able to reason; a person able to be generous; able to
endure pain; able to play on a piano.

3. Specially: Having intellectual qualifications, or strong mental
powers; showing ability or skill; talented; clever; powerful; as, the
ablest man in the senate; an able speech.
No man wrote abler state papers. Macaulay.

4. (Law)

Defn: Legally qualified; possessed of legal competence; as, able to
inherit or devise property.

Note: Able for, is Scotticism.
"Hardly able for such a march." Robertson.

Syn.
 -- Competent; qualified; fitted; efficient; effective; capable;
skillful; clever; vigorous; powerful.

ABLE
A"ble, v. t. Etym: [See Able, a.] [Obs.]

1. To make able; to enable; to strengthen. Chaucer.

2. To vouch for. "I 'll able them." Shak.

ABLE; -ABLE; IBLE; -IBLE
*a*ble. Etym: [F. -able, L. -abilis.]

Defn: An adjective suffix now usually in a passive sense; able to be;
fit to be; expressing capacity or worthiness in a passive sense; as,
movable, able to be moved; amendable, able to be amended; blamable,
fit to be blamed; salable.

Note: The form ible is used in the same sense.

Note: It is difficult to say when we are not to use -able instead of
-ible. "Yet a rule may be laid down as to when we are to use it. To
all verbs, then, from the Anglo-Saxon, to all based on the
uncorrupted infinitival stems of Latin verbs of the first
conjugation, and to all substantives, whencesoever sprung, we annex -
able only." Fitzed. Hall.

ABLE-BODIED
A`ble-bod"ied, a.

Defn: Having a sound, strong body; physically competent; robust.
"Able-bodied vagrant." Froude.
 -- A`ble-bod"ied*ness, n..

ABLEGATE
Ab"le*gate, v. t. Etym: [L. ablegatus, p. p. of ablegare; ab + legare
to send with a commission. See Legate.]

Defn: To send abroad. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABLEGATE
Ab"le*gate, n. (R. C. Ch.)

Defn: A representative of the pope charged with important commissions
in foreign countries, one of his duties being to bring to a newly
named cardinal his insignia of office.

ABLEGATION
Ab`le*ga"tion, n. Etym: [L. ablegatio.]

Defn: The act of sending abroad. [Obs.] Jer. Taylor.

ABLE-MINDED
A`ble-mind"ed, a.

Defn: Having much intellectual power.
 -- A`ble-mind"ed*ness, n.

ABLENESS
A"ble*ness, n.

Defn: Ability of body or mind; force; vigor. [Obs. or R.]

ABLEPSY
Ab"lep*sy, n. Etym: [Gr.

Defn: Blindness. [R.] Urquhart.

ABLER
A"bler, a.,

Defn: comp. of Able.
 -- A"blest, a.,

Defn: superl. of Able.

ABLET; ABLEN
Ab"let, Ab"len Etym: [F. ablet, ablette, a dim. fr. LL. abula, for
albula, dim. of albus white. Cf. Abele.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: A small fresh-water fish (Leuciscus alburnus); the bleak.

ABLIGATE
Ab"li*gate, v. t. Etym: [L. ab + ligatus, p. p. of ligare to tie.]

Defn: To tie up so as to hinder from. [Obs.]

ABLIGURITION
Ab*lig`u*ri"tion, n. Etym: [L. abligurito, fr. abligurire to spend in
luxurious indulgence; ab + ligurire to be lickerish, dainty, fr.
lingere to lick.]

Defn: Prodigal expense for food. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABLINS
A"blins, adv. Etym: [See Able.]

Defn: Perhaps. [Scot.]

ABLOOM
A*bloom", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + bloom.]

Defn: In or into bloom; in a blooming state. Masson.

ABLUDE
Ab*lude", v. t. Etym: [L. abludere; ab + ludere to play.]

Defn: To be unlike; to differ. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

ABLUENT
Ab"lu*ent, a. Etym: [L. abluens, p. pr. of. abluere to wash away; ab
+ luere (lavere, lavare). See Lave.]

Defn: Washing away; carrying off impurities; detergent.
 -- n. (Med.)

Defn: A detergent.

ABLUSH
A*blush", adv. & a. Etym: [Pref. a- + blush.]

Defn: Blushing; ruddy.

ABLUTION
Ab*lu`tion, n. Etym: [L. ablutio, fr. abluere: cf. F. ablution. See
Abluent.]

1. The act of washing or cleansing; specifically, the washing of the
body, or some part of it, as a religious rite.

2. The water used in cleansing. "Cast the ablutions in the main."
Pope.

3. (R. C. Ch.)

Defn: A small quantity of wine and water, which is used to wash the
priest's thumb and index finger after the communion, and which then,
as perhaps containing portions of the consecrated elements, is drunk
by the priest.

ABLUTIONARY
Ab*lu"tion*a*ry, a.

Defn: Pertaining to ablution.

ABLUVION
Ab*lu"vi*on, n. Etym: [LL. abluvio. See Abluent.]

Defn: That which is washed off. [R.] Dwight.

ABLY
A"bly, adv.

Defn: In an able manner; with great ability; as, ably done, planned,
said.

-ABLY
-a*bly(#).

Defn: A suffix composed of -able and the adverbial suffix -ly; as,
favorably.

ABNEGATE
Ab"ne*gate, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abnegated; p. pr. & vb. n.
Abnegating.] Etym: [L. abnegatus,p. p. of abnegare; ab + negare to
deny. See Deny.]

Defn: To deny and reject; to abjure. Sir E. Sandys. Farrar.

ABNEGATION
Ab`ne*ga"tion, n. Etym: [L. abnegatio: cf. F. abnégation.]

Defn: a denial; a renunciation.
With abnegation of God, of his honor, and of religion, they may
retain the friendship of the court. Knox.

ABNEGATIVE
Ab"ne*ga*tive, a. Etym: [L. abnegativus.]

Defn: Denying; renouncing; negative. [R.] Clarke.

ABNEGATOR
Ab"ne*ga`tor(#), n. [L.]

Defn: One who abnegates, denies, or rejects anything. [R.]

ABNET
Ab"net, n. Etym: [Heb.]

Defn: The girdle of a Jewish priest or officer.

ABNODATE
Ab"no*date, v. t. Etym: [L. abnodatus, p. p. of abnodare; ab + nodus
knot.]

Defn: To clear (tress) from knots. [R.] Blount.

ABNODATION
Ab`no*da"tion, n.

Defn: The act of cutting away the knots of trees. [R.] Crabb.

ABNORMAL
Ab*nor"mal, a. Etym: [For earlier anormal.F. anormal, LL. anormalus
for anomalus, Gr. abnormis. See Anomalous, Abnormous, Anormal.]

Defn: Not conformed to rule or system; deviating from the type;
anomalous; irregular. "That deviating from the type; anomalous;
irregular. " Froude.

ABNORMALITY
Ab`nor*mal"i*ty, n.; pl. Abnormalities.

1. The state or quality of being abnormal; variation; irregularity.
Darwin.

2. Something abnormal.

ABNORMALLY
Ab*nor"mal*ly, adv.

Defn: In an abnormal manner; irregularly. Darwin.

ABNORMITY
Ab*nor"mi*ty, n.; pl. Abnormities. Etym: [LL. abnormitas. See
Abnormous.]

Defn: Departure from the ordinary type; irregularity; monstrosity.
"An abnormity . . . like a calf born with two heads." Mrs. Whitney.

ABNORMOUS
Ab*nor"mous, a. Etym: [L. abnormis; ab + norma rule. See Normal.]

Defn: Abnormal; irregular. Hallam.
A character of a more abnormous cast than his equally suspected
coadjutor. State Trials.

ABOARD
A*board", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- on, in + board.]

Defn: On board; into or within a ship or boat; hence, into or within
a railway car.

2. Alongside; as, close aboard. Naut.: To fall aboard of, to strike a
ship's side; to fall foul of.
 -- To haul the tacks aboard, to set the courses.
 -- To keep the land aboard, to hug the shore.
 -- To lay (a ship) aboard, to place one's own ship close alongside
of (a ship) for fighting.

ABOARD
A*board", prep.

1. On board of; as, to go aboard a ship.

2. Across; athwart. [Obs.]
Nor iron bands aboard The Pontic Sea by their huge navy cast.
Spenser.

ABODANCE
A*bod"ance, n. Etym: [See Bode.]

Defn: An omen; a portending. [Obs.]

ABODE
A*bode", pret.

Defn: of Abide.

ABODE
A*bode", n. Etym: [OE. abad, abood, fr. abiden to abide. See Abide.
For the change of vowel, cf. abode, imp. of abide.]

1. Act of waiting; delay. [Obs.] Shak.
And with her fled away without abode. Spenser.

2. Stay or continuance in a place; sojourn.
He waxeth at your abode here. Fielding.

3. Place of continuance, or where one dwells; abiding place;
residence; a dwelling; a habitation.
Come, let me lead you to our poor abode. Wordsworth.

ABODE
A*bode", n. Etym: [See Bode, v. t.]

Defn: An omen. [Obs.]
High-thundering Juno's husband stirs my spirit with true abodes.
Chapman.

ABODE
A*bode", v. t.

Defn: To bode; to foreshow. [Obs.] Shak.

ABODE
A*bode", v. i.

Defn: To be ominous. [Obs.] Dryden.

ABODEMENT
A*bode"ment, n.

Defn: A foreboding; an omen. [Obs.] "Abodements must not now affright
us." Shak.

ABODING
A*bod"ing, n.

Defn: A foreboding. [Obs.]

ABOLISH
A*bol"ish, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abolished; p. pr. & vb. n.
Abolishing.] Etym: [F. abolir, L. abolere, aboletum; ab + olere to
grow. Cf. Finish.]

1. To do away with wholly; to annul; to make void; -- said of laws,
customs, institutions, governments, etc.; as, to abolish slavery, to
abolish folly.

2. To put an end to, or destroy, as a physical objects; to wipe out.
[Archaic]
And with thy blood abolish so reproachful blot. Spenser.
His quick instinctive hand Caught at the hilt, as to abolish him.
Tennyson.

Syn.
 -- To Abolish, Repeal, Abrogate, Revoke, Annul, Nullify, Cancel.
These words have in common the idea of setting aside by some
overruling act. Abolish applies particularly to things of a permanent
nature, such as institutions, usages, customs, etc.; as, to abolish
monopolies, serfdom, slavery. Repeal describes the act by which the
legislature of a state sets aside a law which it had previously
enacted. Abrogate was originally applied to the repeal of a law by
the Roman people; and hence, when the power of making laws was
usurped by the emperors, the term was applied to their act of setting
aside the laws. Thus it came to express that act by which a sovereign
or an executive government sets aside laws, ordinances, regulations,
treaties, conventions, etc. Revoke denotes the act or recalling some
previous grant which conferred, privilege, etc.; as, to revoke a
decree, to revoke a power of attorney, a promise, etc. Thus, also, we
speak of the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. Annul is used in a
more general sense, denoting simply to make void; as, to annul a
contract, to annul an agreement. Nullify is an old word revived in
this country, and applied to the setting of things aside either by
force or by total disregard; as, to nullify an act of Congress.
Cancel is to strike out or annul, by a deliberate exercise of power,
something which has operative force.

ABOLISHABLE
A*bol"ish*a*ble, a. Etym: [Cf. F. abolissable.]

Defn: Capable of being abolished.

ABOLISHER
A*bol"ish*er, n.

Defn: One who abolishes.

ABOLISHMENT
A*bol"ish*ment, n. Etym: [Cf. F. abolissement.]

Defn: The act of abolishing; abolition; destruction. Hooker.

ABOLITION
Ab"o*li"tion, n. Etym: [L. abolitio, fr. abolere: cf. F. abolition.
See Abolish.]

Defn: The act of abolishing, or the state of being abolished; an
annulling; abrogation; utter destruction; as, the abolition of
slavery or the slave trade; the abolition of laws, decrees,
ordinances, customs, taxes, debts, etc.

Note: The application of this word to persons is now unusual or
obsolete

ABOLITIONISM
Ab`o*li"tion*ism, n.

Defn: The principles or measures of abolitionists. Wilberforce.

ABOLITIONIST
Ab`o*li"tion*ist, n.

Defn: A person who favors the abolition of any institution,
especially negro slavery.

ABOLITIONIZE
Ab`o*li`tion*ize, v. t.

Defn: To imbue with the principles of abolitionism. [R.] Bartlett.

ABOMA
A*bo"ma, n. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A large South American serpent (Boa aboma).

ABOMASUM; ABOMASUS
Ab`o*ma"sum, Ab`o*ma"sus, n. Etym: [NL., fr. L. ab + omasum (a Celtic
word.] (Anat.)

Defn: The fourth or digestive stomach of a ruminant, which leads from
the third stomach omasum. See Ruminantia.

ABOMINABLE
A*bom"i*na*ble, a. Etym: [F. abominable. L. abominalis. See
Abominate.]

1. Worthy of, or causing, abhorrence, as a thing of evil omen; odious
in the utmost degree; very hateful; detestable; loathsome; execrable.

2. Excessive; large; -- used as an intensive. [Obs.]

Note: Juliana Berners . . . informs us that in her time [15th c.],
"abomynable syght of monkes" was elegant English for "a large company
of friars." G. P. Marsh.

ABOMINABLENESS
A*bom"i*na*ble*ness, n.

Defn: The quality or state of being abominable; odiousness. Bentley.

ABOMINABLY
A*bom"i*na*bly, adv.

Defn: In an abominable manner; very odiously; detestably.

ABOMINATE
A*bom"i*nate, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abominated; p. pr. & vb. n.
Abominating.] Etym: [L. abominatus, p. p. or abominari to deprecate
as ominous, to abhor, to curse; ab + omen a foreboding. See Omen.]

Defn: To turn from as ill-omened; to hate in the highest degree, as
if with religious dread; loathe; as, to abominate all impiety.

Syn.
 -- To hate; abhor; loathe; detest. See Hate.

ABOMINATION
A*bom`i*na"tion, n. Etym: [OE. abominacioun, -cion, F. abominatio.
See Abominate.]

1. The feeling of extreme disgust and hatred; abhorrence;
detestation; loathing; as, he holds tobacco in abomination.

2. That which is abominable; anything hateful, wicked, or shamefully
vile; an object or state that excites disgust and hatred; a hateful
or shameful vice; pollution.
Antony, most large in his abominations. Shak.

3. A cause of pollution or wickedness.

Syn.
 -- Detestation; loathing; abhorrence; disgust; aversion;
loathsomeness; odiousness. Sir W. Scott.

ABOON
A*boon", prep.

Defn: and adv. Above. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]
Aboon the pass of Bally-Brough. Sir W. Scott.
The ceiling fair that rose aboon. J. R. Drake.

ABORAL
Ab*o"ral, a. Etym: [L. ab. + E. oral.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Situated opposite to, or away from, the mouth.

ABORD
A*bord", n. Etym: [F.]

Defn: Manner of approaching or accosting; address. Chesterfield.

ABORD
A*bord", v. t. Etym: [F. aborder, à (L. ad) + bord rim, brim, or side
of a vessel. See Border, Board.]

Defn: To approach; to accost. [Obs.] Digby.

ABORIGINAL
Ab`o*rig"i*nal, a. Etym: [See Aborigines.]

1. First; original; indigenous; primitive; native; as, the aboriginal
tribes of America. "Mantled o'er with aboriginal turf." Wordsworth.

2. Of or pertaining to aborigines; as, a Hindoo of aboriginal blood.

ABORIGINAL
Ab`o*rig"i*nal, n.

1. An original inhabitant of any land; one of the aborigines.

2. An animal or a plant native to the region.
It may well be doubted whether this frog is an aboriginal of these
islands. Darwin.

ABORIGINALITY
Ab`o*rig`i*nal"i*ty, n.

Defn: The quality of being aboriginal. Westm. Rev.

ABORIGINALLY
Ab`o*rig"i*nal*ly, adv.

Defn: Primarily.

ABORIGINES
Ab`o*rig"i*nes, n. pl. Etym: [L. Aborigines; ab + origo, especially
the first inhabitants of Latium, those who originally (ab origine)
inhabited Latium or Italy. See Origin.]

1. The earliest known inhabitants of a country; native races.

2. The original fauna and flora of a geographical area

ABORSEMENT
A*borse"ment, n.

Defn: Abortment; abortion. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

ABORSIVE
A*bor"sive, a.

Defn: Abortive. [Obs.] Fuller.

ABORT
A*bort", v. i. Etym: [L. abortare, fr. abortus, p. p. of aboriri; ab
+ oriri to rise, to be born. See Orient.]

1. To miscarry; to bring forth young prematurely.

2. (Biol.)

Defn: To become checked in normal development, so as either to remain
rudimentary or shrink away wholly; to become sterile.

ABORT
A*bort", n. Etym: [L. abortus, fr. aboriri.]

1. An untimely birth. [Obs.] Sir H. Wotton.

2. An aborted offspring. [Obs.] Holland.

ABORTED
A*bort"ed, a.

1. Brought forth prematurely.

2. (Biol.)

Defn: Rendered abortive or sterile; undeveloped; checked in normal
development at a very early stage; as, spines are aborted branches.
The eyes of the cirripeds are more or less aborted in their mature
state. Owen.

ABORTICIDE
A*bor"ti*cide, n. Etym: [L. abortus + caedere to kill. See Abort.]
(Med.)

Defn: The act of destroying a fetus in the womb; feticide.

ABORTIFACIENT
A*bor`ti*fa"cient, a. Etym: [L. abortus (see Abort, v.) + faciens, p.
pr. of facere to make.]

Defn: Producing miscarriage.
 -- n.

Defn: A drug or an agent that causes premature delivery.

ABORTION
A*bor"tion, n. Etym: [L. abortio, fr. aboriri. See Abort.]

1. The act of giving premature birth; particularly, the expulsion of
the human fetus prematurely, or before it is capable of sustaining
life; miscarriage.

Note: It is sometimes used for the offense of procuring a premature
delivery, but strictly the early delivery is the abortion, "causing
or procuring abortion" is the full name of the offense. Abbott.

2. The immature product of an untimely birth.

3. (Biol.)

Defn: Arrest of development of any organ, so that it remains an
imperfect formation or is absorbed.

4. Any fruit or produce that does not come to maturity, or anything
which in its progress, before it is matured or perfect; a complete
failure; as, his attempt. proved an abortiori.

ABORTIONAL
A*bor"tion*al, a.

Defn: Pertaining to abortion; miscarrying; abortive. Carlyle.

ABORTIONIST
A*bor"tion*ist, n.

Defn: One who procures abortion or miscarriage.

ABORTIVE
A*bor"tive, a. Etym: [L. abortivus, fr. aboriri. See Abort, v.]

1. Produced by abortion; born prematurely; as, an abortive child.
[R.]

2. Made from the skin of a still-born animal; as, abortive vellum.
[Obs.]

3. Rendering fruitless or ineffectual. [Obs.] "Plunged in that
abortive gulf." Milton.

4. Coming to naught; failing in its effect; miscarrying; fruitless;
unsuccessful; as, an abortive attempt. "An abortive enterprise."
Prescott.

5. (Biol.)

Defn: Imperfectly formed or developed; rudimentary; sterile; as, an
abortive organ, stamen, ovule, etc.

6. (Med.)
(a) Causing abortion; as, abortive medicines. Parr.
(b) Cutting short; as, abortive treatment of typhoid fever.

ABORTIVE
A*bor"tive, n.

1. That which is born or brought forth prematurely; an abortion.
[Obs.] Shak.

2. A fruitless effort or issue. [Obs.]

3. A medicine to which is attributed the property of causing
abortion. Dunglison.

ABORTIVELY
A*bor"tive*ly, adv.

Defn: In an abortive or untimely manner; immaturely; fruitlessly.

ABORTIVENESS
A*bor"tive*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abortive.

ABORTMENT
A*bort"ment, n.

Defn: Abortion. [Obs.]

ABOUGHT
A*bought", imp. & p. p.

Defn: of Aby. [Obs.]

ABOUND
A*bound", v. i. [imp. & p. p. Abounded; p. pr. & vb. n. Abounding.]
Etym: [OE. abounden, F. abonder, fr. L. abundare to overflow, abound;
ab + unda wave. Cf. Undulate.]

1. To be in great plenty; to be very prevalent; to be plentiful.
The wild boar which abounds in some parts of the continent of Europe.
Chambers.
Where sin abounded grace did much more abound. Rom. v. 20.

2. To be copiously supplied; -- followed by in or with. To abound in,
to posses in such abundance as to be characterized by.
 -- To abound with, to be filled with; to possess in great numbers.
Men abounding in natural courage. Macaulay.
A faithful man shall abound with blessings. Prov. xxviii. 20.
It abounds with cabinets of curiosities. Addison.

ABOUT
A*bout", prep. Etym: [OE. aboute, abouten, abuten; AS. abutan,
onbutan; on + butan, which is from be by + utan outward, from ut out.
See But, Out.]

1. Around; all round; on every side of. "Look about you." Shak. "Bind
them about thy neck." Prov. iii. 3.

2. In the immediate neighborhood of; in contiguity or proximity to;
near, as to place; by or on (one's person). "Have you much money
about you" Bulwer.

3. Over or upon different parts of; through or over in various
directions; here and there in; to and fro in; throughout.
Lampoons . . . were handed about the coffeehouses. Macaulay.
Roving still about the world. Milton.

4. Near; not far from; -- determining approximately time, size,
quantity. "To-morrow, about this time." Exod. ix. 18. "About my
stature." Shak.
He went out about the third hour. Matt. xx. 3.

Note: This use passes into the adverbial sense.

5. In concern with; engaged in; intent on.
I must be about my Father's business. Luke ii. 49.

6. Before a verbal noun or an infinitive:

Defn: On the point or verge of; going; in act of.
Paul was now aboutto open his mouth. Acts xviii. 14.

7. Concerning; with regard to; on account of; touching. "To treat
about thy ransom." Milton.
She must have her way about Sarah. Trollope.

ABOUT
A*bout", adv.

1. On all sides; around.
'Tis time to look about. Shak.

2. In circuit; circularly; by a circuitous way; around the outside;
as, a mile about, and a third of a mile across.

3. Here and there; around; in one place and another.
Wandering about from house to house. 1 Tim. v. 13.

4. Nearly; approximately; with close correspondence, in quality,
manner, degree, etc.; as, about as cold; about as high; -- also of
quantity, number, time. "There fell . . . about three thousand men."
Exod. xxii. 28.

5. To a reserved position; half round; in the opposite direction; on
the opposite tack; as, to face about; to turn one's self about. To
bring about, to cause to take place; to accomplish.
 -- To come about, to occur; to take place. See under Come.
 -- To go about, To set about, to undertake; to arrange; to prepare.
"Shall we set about some revels Shak.
 -- Round about, in every direction around.

ABOUT-SLEDGE
A*bout"-sledge", n.

Defn: The largest hammer used by smiths. Weale.

ABOVE
A*bove", prep. Etym: [OE. above, aboven, abuffe, AS. abufon; an (or
on) on + be by + ufan upward; cf. Goth. uf under. *199. See Over.]

1. In or to a higher place; higher than; on or over the upper
surface; over; -- opposed to below or beneath.
Fowl that may fly above the earth. Gen. i. 20.

2. Figuratively, higher than; superior to in any respect; surpassing;
beyond; higher in measure or degree than; as, things above
comprehension; above mean actions; conduct above reproach. "Thy worth
. . . is actions above my gifts." Marlowe.
I saw in the way a light from heaven above the brightness of the sun.
Acts xxxvi. 13.

3. Surpassing in number or quantity; more than; as, above a hundred.
(Passing into the adverbial sense. See Above, adv., 4.) above all,
before every other consideration; chiefly; in preference to other
things. Over and above, prep. or adv., besides; in addition to.

ABOVE
A*bove", adv.

1. In a higher place; overhead; into or from heaven; as, the clouds
above.

2. Earlier in order; higher in the same page; hence, in a foregoing
page. "That was said above." Dryden.

3. Higher in rank or power; as, he appealed to the court above.

4. More than; as, above five hundred were present.

Note: Above is often used elliptically as an adjective by omitting
the word mentioned, quoted, or the like; as, the above observations,
the above reference, the above articles.
 -- Above is also used substantively. "The waters that come down from
above." Josh. iii. 13. It is also used as the first part of a
compound in the sense of before, previously; as, above-cited, above-
described, above-mentioned, above-named, abovesaid, abovespecified,
above-written, above-given.

ABOVEBOARD
A*bove"board`, adv.

Defn: Above the board or table. Hence: in open sight; without trick,
concealment, or deception. "Fair and aboveboard." Burke.

Note: This expression is said by Johnson to have been borrowed from
gamesters, who, when they change their cards, put their hands under
the table.

ABOVE-CITED
A*bove"-cit`ed, a.

Defn: Cited before, in the preceding part of a book or writing.

ABOVEDECK
A*bove"deck`, a.

Defn: On deck; and hence, like aboveboard, without artifice. Smart.

ABOVE-MENTIONED; ABOVE-NAMED
A*bove"-men`tioned, A*bove"-named`(#), a.

Defn: Mentioned or named before; aforesaid.

ABOVESAID
A*bove"said`, a.

Defn: Mentioned or recited before.

ABOX
A*box", adv. & a. (Naut.)

Defn: Braced aback.

ABRA
A"bra, n. [Sp., a bay, valley, fissure.]

Defn: A narrow pass or defile; a break in a mesa; the mouth of a
cañon. [Southwestern U. S.]

ABRACADABRA
Ab`ra*ca*dab"ra, n. Etym: [L. Of unknown origin.]

Defn: A mystical word or collocation of letters written as in the
figure. Worn on an amulet it was supposed to ward off fever. At
present the word is used chiefly in jest to denote something without
meaning; jargon.

ABRADANT
Ab*ra"dant, n.

Defn: A material used for grinding, as emery, sand, powdered glass,
etc.

ABRADE
Ab*rade", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abraded; p. pr. & vb. n. Abrading.]
Etym: [L. abradere, abrasum, to scrape off; ab + radere to scrape.
See Rase, Raze.]

Defn: To rub or wear off; to waste or wear away by friction; as, to
abrade rocks. Lyell.

ABRADE
A*brade", v. t.

Defn: Same as Abraid. [Obs.]

ABRAHAMIC
A`bra*ham"ic, a.

Defn: Pertaining to Abraham, the patriarch; as, the Abrachamic
covenant.

ABRAHAMITIC; ABRAHAMITICAL
A`bra*ham*it"ic, A`bra*ham*it*ic*al(#), a.

Defn: Relating to the patriarch Abraham.

ABRAHAM-MAN; ABRAM-MAN
A"bra*ham-man`(#) or A"bram-man`(#), n. Etym: [Possibly in allusion
to the parable of the beggar Lazarus in Luke xvi. Murray (New Eng.
Dict. ).]

Defn: One of a set of vagabonds who formerly roamed through England,
feigning lunacy for the sake of obtaining alms. Nares. To sham
Abraham, to feign sickness. Goldsmith.

ABRAID
A*braid", v. t. & i. Etym: [OE. abraiden, to awake, draw (a sword),
AS. abredgan to shake, draw; pref. a- (cf. Goth. us-, Ger. er-, orig.
meaning out) + bregdan to shake, throw. See Braid.]

Defn: To awake; to arouse; to stir or start up; also, to shout out.
[Obs.] Chaucer.

ABRANCHIAL
A*bran"chi*al, a. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Abranchiate.

ABRANCHIATA
A*bran`chi*a"ta, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A group of annelids, so called because the species composing it
have no special organs of respiration.

ABRANCHIATE
A*bran"chi*ate, a. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Without gills.

ABRASE
Ab*rase", a. Etym: [L. abrasus, p. p. of abradere. See Abrade.]

Defn: Rubbed smooth. [Obs.] "An abrase table." B. Jonson.

ABRASION
Ab*ra"sion, n. Etym: [L. abrasio, fr. abradere. See Abrade.]

1. The act of abrading, wearing, or rubbing off; the wearing away by
friction; as, the abrasion of coins.

2. The substance rubbed off. Berkeley.

3. (Med.)

Defn: A superficial excoriation, with loss of substance under the
form of small shreds. Dunglison.

ABRASIVE
Ab*ra"sive, a.

Defn: Producing abrasion. Ure.

ABRAUM; ABRAUM SALTS
A*braum" or A*braum" salts, n. Etym: [Ger., fr. abräumen to remove.]

Defn: A red ocher used to darken mahogany and for making chloride of
potassium.

ABRAXAS
A*brax"as, n. Etym: [A name adopted by the Egyptian Gnostic
Basilides, containing the Greek letters , , , , , , , which, as
numerals, amounted to 365. It was used to signify the supreme deity
as ruler of the 365 heavens of his system.]

Defn: A mystical word used as a charm and engraved on gems among the
ancients; also, a gem stone thus engraved.

ABRAY
A*bray", v. Etym: [A false form from the preterit abraid, abrayde.]

Defn: See Abraid. [Obs.] Spenser.

ABREACTION
Ab`re*ac"tion, n. [Pref. ab-+ reaction, after G. Abreagirung.]
(Psychotherapy)

Defn: See Catharsis, below.

ABREAST
A*breast", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + breast.]

1. Side by side, with breasts in a line; as, "Two men could hardly
walk abreast." Macaulay.

2. (Naut.)

Defn: Side by side; also, opposite; over against; on a line with the
vessel's beam; -- with of.

3. Up to a certain level or line; equally advanced; as, to keep
abreast of [or with] the present state of science.

4. At the same time; simultaneously. [Obs.]
Abreast therewith began a convocation. Fuller.

ABREGGE
A*breg"ge, v. t.

Defn: See Abridge. [Obs.]

ABRENOUNCE
Ab`re*nounce", v. t. Etym: [L. abrenuntiare; ab + renuntiare. See
Renounce.]

Defn: To renounce. [Obs.] "They abrenounce and cast them off."
Latimer.

ABRENUNCIATION
Ab`re*nun`ci*a"tion, n. Etym: [LL. abrenuntiatio. See Abrenounce.]

Defn: Absolute renunciation or repudiation. [Obs.]
An abrenunciation of that truth which he so long had professed, and
still believed. Fuller.

ABREPTION
Ab*rep"tion, n. Etym: [L. abreptus, p. p. of abripere to snatch away;
ab + rapere to snatch.]

Defn: A snatching away. [Obs.]

ABREUVOIR
A`breu`voir", n. Etym: [F., a watering place.] (Masonry)

Defn: The joint or interstice between stones, to be filled with
mortar. Gwilt.

ABRICOCK
A"bri*cock, n.

Defn: See Apricot. [Obs.]

ABRIDGE
A*bridge", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abridged; p. pr. & vb. n. Abridging.]
Etym: [OE. abregen, OF. abregier, F. abréger, fr. L. abbreviare; ad +
brevis short. See Brief and cf. Abbreviate.]

1. To make shorter; to shorten in duration; to lessen; to diminish;
to curtail; as, to abridge labor; to abridge power or rights. "The
bridegroom . . . abridged his visit." Smollett.
She retired herself to Sebaste, and abridged her train from state to
necessity. Fuller.

2. To shorten or contract by using fewer words, yet retaining the
sense; to epitomize; to condense; as, to abridge a history or
dictionary.

3. To deprive; to cut off; -- followed by of, and formerly by from;
as, to abridge one of his rights.

ABRIDGER
A*bridg"er, n.

Defn: One who abridges.

ABRIDGMENT
A*bridg"ment, n. Etym: [OE. abregement. See Abridge.]

1. The act abridging, or the state of being abridged; diminution;
lessening; reduction or deprivation; as, an abridgment of pleasures
or of expenses.

2. An epitome or compend, as of a book; a shortened or abridged form;
an abbreviation.
Ancient coins as abridgments of history. Addison.

3. That which abridges or cuts short; hence, an entertainment that
makes the time pass quickly. [Obs.]
What abridgment have you for this evening What mask What music Shak.

Syn.
 -- Abridgment, Compendium, Epitome, Abstract, Synopsis. An
abridgment is made by omitting the less important parts of some
larger work; as, an abridgment of a dictionary. A compendium is a
brief exhibition of a subject, or science, for common use; as, a
compendium of American literature. An epitome corresponds to a
compendium, and gives briefly the most material points of a subject;
as, an epitome of history. An abstract is a brief statement of a
thing in its main points. A synopsis is a bird's-eye view of a
subject, or work, in its several parts.

ABROACH
A*broach", v. t. Etym: [OE. abrochen, OF. abrochier. See Broach.]

Defn: To set abroach; to let out, as liquor; to broach; to tap.
[Obs.] Chaucer.

ABROACH
A*broach", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + broach.]

1. Broached; in a condition for letting out or yielding liquor, as a
cask which is tapped.
Hogsheads of ale were set abroach. Sir W. Scott.

2. Hence: In a state to be diffused or propagated; afoot; astir.
"Mischiefs that I set abroach." Shak.

ABROAD
A*broad", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + broad.]

1. At large; widely; broadly; over a wide space; as, a tree spreads
its branches abroad.
The fox roams far abroad. Prior.

2. Without a certain confine; outside the house; away from one's
abode; as, to walk abroad.
I went to St. James', where another was preaching in the court
abroad. Evelyn.

3. Beyond the bounds of a country; in foreign countries; as, we have
broils at home and enemies abroad. "Another prince . . . was living
abroad." Macaulay.

4. Before the public at large; throughout society or the world; here
and there; widely.
He went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the
matter. Mark i. 45.
To be abroad. (a) To be wide of the mark; to be at fault; as, you are
all abroad in your guess. (b) To be at a loss or nonplused.

ABROGABLE
Ab"ro*ga*ble, a.

Defn: Capable of being abrogated.

ABROGATE
Ab"ro*gate, a. Etym: [L. abrogatus, p. p.]

Defn: Abrogated; abolished. [Obs.] Latimer.

ABROGATE
Ab"ro*gate, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abrogated; p. pr. & vb. n.
Abrogating.] Etym: [L. abrogatus, p. p. of abrogare; ab + rogare to
ask, require, propose. See Rogation.]

1. To annul by an authoritative act; to abolish by the authority of
the maker or his successor; to repeal; -- applied to the repeal of
laws, decrees, ordinances, the abolition of customs, etc.
Let us see whether the New Testament abrogates what we so frequently
see in the Old. South.
Whose laws, like those of the Medes and Persian, they can not alter
or abrogate. Burke.

2. To put an end to; to do away with. Shak.

Syn.
 -- To abolish; annul; do away; set aside; revoke; repeal; cancel;
annihilate. See Abolish.

ABROGATION
Ab`ro*ga"tion, n. Etym: [L. abrogatio, fr. abrogare: cf. F.
abrogation.]

Defn: The act of abrogating; repeal by authority. Hume.

ABROGATIVE
Ab"ro*ga*tive, a.

Defn: Tending or designed to abrogate; as, an abrogative law.

ABROGATOR
Ab"ro*ga`tor, n.

Defn: One who repeals by authority.

ABROOD
A*brood", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + brood.]

Defn: In the act of brooding. [Obs.] Abp. Sancroft.

ABROOK
A*brook", v. t. Etym: [Pref. a- + brook, v.]

Defn: To brook; to endure. [Obs.] Shak.

ABRUPT
Ab*rupt", a. Etym: [L. abruptus, p. p. of abrumpere to break off; ab
+ rumpere to break. See Rupture.]

1. Broken off; very steep, or craggy, as rocks, precipices, banks;
precipitous; steep; as, abrupt places. "Tumbling through ricks
abrupt," Thomson.

2. Without notice to prepare the mind for the event; sudden; hasty;
unceremonious. "The cause of your abrupt departure." Shak.

3. Having sudden transitions from one subject to another;
unconnected.
The abrupt style, which hath many breaches. B. Jonson.

4. (Bot.)

Defn: Suddenly terminating, as if cut off. Gray.

Syn.
 -- Sudden; unexpected; hasty; rough; curt; unceremonious; rugged;
blunt; disconnected; broken.

ABRUPT
Ab*rupt", n. Etym: [L. abruptum.]

Defn: An abrupt place. [Poetic]
"Over the vast abrupt." Milton.

ABRUPT
Ab*rupt", v. t.

Defn: To tear off or asunder. [Obs.] "Till death abrupts them." Sir
T. Browne.

ABRUPTION
Ab*rup"tion, n. Etym: [L. abruptio, fr. abrumpere: cf. F. abruption.]

Defn: A sudden breaking off; a violent separation of bodies.
Woodward.

ABRUPTLY
Ab*rupt"ly, adv.

1. In an abrupt manner; without giving notice, or without the usual
forms; suddenly.

2. Precipitously. Abruptly pinnate (Bot.), pinnate without an odd
leaflet, or other appendage, at the end. Gray.

ABRUPTNESS
Ab*rupt"ness, n.

1. The state of being abrupt or broken; craggedness; ruggedness;
steepness.

2. Suddenness; unceremonious haste or vehemence; as, abruptness of
style or manner.

ABSCESS
Ab"scess, n.; pl. Abscesses. Etym: [L. abscessus a going away,
gathering of humors, abscess, fr. abscessus, p. p. of absedere to go
away; ab, abs + cedere to go off, retire. See Cede.] (Med.)

Defn: A collection of pus or purulent matter in any tissue or organ
of the body, the result of a morbid process. Cold abscess, an abscess
of slow formation, unattended with the pain and heat characteristic
of ordinary abscesses, and lasting for years without exhibiting any
tendency towards healing; a chronic abscess.

ABSCESSION
Ab*sces"sion, n. Etym: [L. abscessio a separation; fr. absedere. See
Abscess.]

Defn: A separating; removal; also, an abscess. [Obs.] Gauden.
Barrough.

ABSCIND
Ab*scind", v. t. Etym: [L. absindere; ab + scindere to rend, cut. See
Schism.]

Defn: To cut off. [R.] "Two syllables . . . abscinded from the rest."
Johnson.

ABSCISION
Ab*sci"sion, n. Etym: [L. abscisio.]

Defn: See Abscission.

ABSCISS
Ab"sciss, n.; pl. Abscisses.

Defn: See Abscissa.

ABSCISSA
Ab*scis"sa, n.; E. pl. Abscissas, L. pl. Abscissæ. Etym: [L., fem. of
abscissus, p. p. of absindere to cut of. See Abscind.] (Geom.)

Defn: One of the elements of reference by which a point, as of a
curve, is referred to a system of fixed rectilineal coördinate axes.

Note: When referred to two intersecting axes, one of them called the
axis of abscissas, or of X, and the other the axis of ordinates, or
of Y, the abscissa of the point is the distance cut off from the axis
of X by a line drawn through it and parallel to the axis of Y. When a
point in space is referred to three axes having a common
intersection, the abscissa may be the distance measured parallel to
either of them, from the point to the plane of the other two axes.
Abscissas and ordinates taken together are called coördinates.
 -- OX or PY is the abscissa of the point P of the curve, OY or PX
its ordinate, the intersecting lines OX and OY being the axes of
abscissas and ordinates respectively, and the point O their origin.

ABSCISSION
Ab*scis"sion, n. Etym: [L. abscissio. See Abscind.]

1. The act or process of cutting off. "Not to be cured without the
abscission of a member." Jer. Taylor.

2. The state of being cut off. Sir T. Browne.

3. (Rhet.)

Defn: A figure of speech employed when a speaker having begun to say
a thing stops abruptly: thus, "He is a man of so much honor and
candor, and of such generosity -- but I need say no more."

ABSCOND
Ab*scond", v. i. [imp. & p. p. Absconded; p. pr. & vb. n.
Absconding.] Etym: [L. abscondere to hide; ab, abs + condere to lay
up; con + dare (only in comp.) to put. Cf. Do.]

1. To hide, withdraw, or be concealed.
The marmot absconds all winter. Ray.

2. To depart clandestinely; to steal off and secrete one's self; --
used especially of persons who withdraw to avoid a legal process; as,
an absconding debtor.
That very homesickness which, in regular armies, drives so many
recruits to abscond. Macaulay.

ABSCOND
Ab*scond", v. t.

Defn: To hide; to conceal. [Obs.] Bentley.

ABSCONDENCE
Ab*scond"ence, n.

Defn: Fugitive concealment; secret retirement; hiding. [R.] Phillips.

ABSCONDER
Ab*scond"er, n.

Defn: One who absconds.

ABSENCE
Ab"sence, n. Etym: [F., fr. L. absentia. See Absent.]

1. A state of being absent or withdrawn from a place or from
companionship; -- opposed to presence.
Not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence. Phil.
ii. 12.

2. Want; destitution; withdrawal. "In the absence of conventional
law." Kent.

3. Inattention to things present; abstraction (of mind); as, absence
of mind. "Reflecting on the little absences and distractions of
mankind." Addison.
To conquer that abstraction which is called absence. Landor.

ABSENT
Ab"sent, a. Etym: [F., fr. absens, absentis, p. pr. of abesse to be
away from; ab + esse to be. Cf. Sooth.]

1. Being away from a place; withdrawn from a place; not present.
"Expecting absent friends." Shak.

2. Not existing; lacking; as, the part was rudimental or absent.

3. Inattentive to what is passing; absent-minded; preoccupied; as, an
absent air.
What is commonly called an absent man is commonly either a very weak
or a very affected man. Chesterfield.

Syn.
 -- Absent, Abstracted. These words both imply a want of attention to
surrounding objects. We speak of a man as absent when his thoughts
wander unconsciously from present scenes or topics of discourse; we
speak of him as abstracted when his mind (usually for a brief period)
is drawn off from present things by some weighty matter for
reflection. Absence of mind is usually the result of loose habits of
thought; abstraction commonly arises either from engrossing interests
and cares, or from unfortunate habits of association.

ABSENT
Ab*sent", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Absented; p. pr. & vb. n. Absenting.]
Etym: [Cf. F. absenter.]

1. To take or withdraw (one's self) to such a distance as to prevent
intercourse; -- used with the reflexive pronoun.
If after due summons any member absents himself, he is to be fined.
Addison.

2. To withhold from being present. [Obs.] "Go; for thy stay, not
free, absents thee more." Milton.

ABSENTANEOUS
Ab`sen*ta"ne*ous, a. Etym: [LL. absentaneus. See absent]

Defn: Pertaining to absence. [Obs.]

ABSENTATION
Ab`sen*ta"tion, n.

Defn: The act of absenting one's self. Sir W. Hamilton.

ABSENTEE
Ab`sen*tee", n.

Defn: One who absents himself from his country, office, post, or
duty; especially, a landholder who lives in another country or
district than that where his estate is situated; as, an Irish
absentee. Macaulay.

ABSENTEEISM
Ab`sen*tee"ism, n.

Defn: The state or practice of an absentee; esp. the practice of
absenting one's self from the country or district where one's estate
is situated.

ABSENTER
Ab*sent"er, n.

Defn: One who absents one's self.

ABSENTLY
Ab"sent*ly, adv.

Defn: In an absent or abstracted manner.

ABSENTMENT
Ab*sent"ment, n.

Defn: The state of being absent; withdrawal. [R.] Barrow.

ABSENT-MINDED
Ab`sent-mind"ed(#), a.

Defn: Absent in mind; abstracted; preoccupied.
 -- Ab`sent-mind"ed*ness, n.
 -- Ab`sent-mind"ed*ly, adv.

ABSENTNESS
Ab"sent*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being absent-minded. H. Miller.

ABSEY-BOOK
Ab"sey-book`(#), n.

Defn: An A-B-C book; a primer. [Obs.] Shak.

ABSINTHATE
Ab"sin"thate, n. (Chem.)

Defn: A combination of absinthic acid with a base or positive
radical.

ABSINTHE; ABSINTH
Ab"sinthe`, Ab"sinth`, n. Etym: [F. absinthe. See Absinthium.]

1. The plant absinthium or common wormwood.

2. A strong spirituous liqueur made from wormwood and brandy or
alcohol.

ABSINTHIAL
Ab*sin"thi*al, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to wormwood; absinthian.

ABSINTHIAN
Ab*sin"thi*an, n.

Defn: Of the nature of wormwood. "Absinthian bitterness." T.
Randolph.

ABSINTHIATE
Ab"sin"thi*ate, v. t. Etym: [From L. absinthium: cf. L. absinthiatus,
a.]

Defn: To impregnate with wormwood.

ABSINTHIATED
Ab*sin"thi*a`ted, a.

Defn: Impregnated with wormwood; as, absinthiated wine.

ABSINTHIC
Ab*sin"thic, a. (Chem.)

Defn: Relating to the common wormwood or to an acid obtained from it.

ABSINTHIN
Ab*sin"thin, n. (Chem.)

Defn: The bitter principle of wormwood (Artemisia absinthium). Watts.

ABSINTHISM
Ab"sin*thism, n.

Defn: The condition of being poisoned by the excessive use of
absinth.

ABSINTHIUM
Ab*sin"thi*um, n. Etym: [L., from Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: The common wormwood (Artemisia absinthium), an intensely bitter
plant, used as a tonic and for making the oil of wormwood.

ABSIS
Ab"sis, n.

Defn: See Apsis.

ABSIST
Ab*sist", v. i. Etym: [L. absistere, p. pr. absistens; ab + sistere
to stand, causal of stare.]

Defn: To stand apart from; top leave off; to desist. [Obs.] Raleigh.

ABSISTENCE
Ab*sist"ence, n.

Defn: A standing aloof. [Obs.]

ABSOLUTE
Ab"so*lute, a. Etym: [L. absolutus, p. p. of absolvere: cf. F.
absolu. See Absolve.]

1. Loosed from any limitation or condition; uncontrolled;
unrestricted; unconditional; as, absolute authority, monarchy,
sovereignty, an absolute promise or command; absolute power; an
absolute monarch.

2. Complete in itself; perfect; consummate; faultless; as, absolute
perfection; absolute beauty.
So absolute she seems, And in herself complete. Milton.

3. Viewed apart from modifying influences or without comparison with
other objects; actual; real; -- opposed to relative and comparative;
as, absolute motion; absolute time or space.

Note: Absolute rights and duties are such as pertain to man in a
state of nature as contradistinguished from relative rights and
duties, or such as pertain to him in his social relations.

4. Loosed from, or unconnected by, dependence on any other being;
self-existent; self-sufficing.

Note: In this sense God is called the Absolute by the Theist. The
term is also applied by the Pantheist to the universe, or the total
of all existence, as only capable of relations in its parts to each
other and to the whole, and as dependent for its existence and its
phenomena on its mutually depending forces and their laws.

5. Capable of being thought or conceived by itself alone;
unconditioned; non-relative.

Note: It is in dispute among philosopher whether the term, in this
sense, is not applied to a mere logical fiction or abstraction, or
whether the absolute, as thus defined, can be known, as a reality, by
the human intellect.
To Cusa we can indeed articulately trace, word and thing, the recent
philosophy of the absolute. Sir W. Hamilton.

6. Positive; clear; certain; not doubtful. [R.]
I am absolute 't was very Cloten. Shak.

7. Authoritative; peremptory. [R.]
The peddler stopped, and tapped her on the head, With absolute
forefinger, brown and ringed. Mrs. Browning.

8. (Chem.)

Defn: Pure; unmixed; as, absolute alcohol.

9. (Gram.)

Defn: Not immediately dependent on the other parts of the sentence in
government; as, the case absolute. See Ablative absolute, under
Ablative. Absolute curvature (Geom.), that curvature of a curve of
double curvature, which is measured in the osculating plane of the
curve.
 -- Absolute equation (Astron.), the sum of the optic and eccentric
equations.
 -- Absolute space (Physics), space considered without relation to
material limits or objects.
 -- Absolute terms. (Alg.), such as are known, or which do not
contain the unknown quantity. Davies & Peck.
 -- Absolute temperature (Physics), the temperature as measured on a
scale determined by certain general thermo-dynamic principles, and
reckoned from the absolute zero.
 -- Absolute zero (Physics), the be ginning, or zero point, in the
scale of absolute temperature. It is equivalent to -273º centigrade
or -459.4º Fahrenheit.

Syn.
 -- Positive; peremptory; certain; unconditional; unlimited;
unrestricted; unqualified; arbitrary; despotic; autocratic.

ABSOLUTE
Ab"so*lute, n. (Geom.)

Defn: In a plane, the two imaginary circular points at infinity; in
space of three dimensions, the imaginary circle at infinity.

ABSOLUTELY
Ab"so*lute*ly, adv.

Defn: In an absolute, independent, or unconditional manner; wholly;
positively.

ABSOLUTENESS
Ab"so*lute*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being absolute; independence of everything
extraneous; unlimitedness; absolute power; independent reality;
positiveness.

ABSOLUTION
Ab`so*lu"tion, n. Etym: [F. absolution, L. absolutio, fr. absolvere
to absolve. See Absolve.]

1. An absolving, or setting free from guilt, sin, or penalty;
forgiveness of an offense. "Government . . . granting absolution to
the nation." Froude.

2. (Civil Law)

Defn: An acquittal, or sentence of a judge declaring and accused
person innocent. [Obs.]

3. (R. C. Ch.)

Defn: The exercise of priestly jurisdiction in the sacrament of
penance, by which Catholics believe the sins of the truly penitent
are forgiven.

Note: In the English and other Protestant churches, this act regarded
as simply declaratory, not as imparting forgiveness.

4. (Eccl.)

Defn: An absolving from ecclesiastical penalties, -- for example,
excommunication. P. Cyc.

5. The form of words by which a penitent is absolved. Shipley.

6. Delivery, in speech. [Obs.] B. Jonson. Absolution day (R. C. Ch.),
Tuesday before Easter.

ABSOLUTISM
Ab"so*lu`tism, n.

1. The state of being absolute; the system or doctrine of the
absolute; the principles or practice of absolute or arbitrary
government; despotism.
The element of absolutism and prelacy was controlling. Palfrey.

2. (Theol.)

Defn: Doctrine of absolute decrees. Ash.

ABSOLUTIST
Ab"so*lu`tist, n.

1. One who is in favor of an absolute or autocratic government.

2. (Metaph.)

Defn: One who believes that it is possible to realize a cognition or
concept of the absolute. Sir. W. Hamilton.

ABSOLUTIST
Ab"so*lu`tist, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to absolutism; arbitrary; despotic; as,
absolutist principles.

ABSOLUTISTIC
Ab`so*lu*tis"tic, a.

Defn: Pertaining to absolutism; absolutist.

ABSOLUTORY
Ab*sol"u*to*ry, a. Etym: [L. absolutorius, fr. absolvere to absolve.]

Defn: Serving to absolve; absolving. "An absolutory sentence."
Ayliffe.

ABSOLVABLE
Ab*solv"a*ble, a.

Defn: That may be absolved.

ABSOLVATORY
Ab*solv"a*to*ry, a.

Defn: Conferring absolution; absolutory.

ABSOLVE
Ab*solve" (#; 277), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Absolved; p. pr. & vb. n.
Absolving.] Etym: [L. absolvere to set free, to absolve; ab + solvere
to loose. See Assoil, Solve.]

1. To set free, or release, as from some obligation, debt, or
responsibility, or from the consequences of guilt or such ties as it
would be sin or guilt to violate; to pronounce free; as, to absolve a
subject from his allegiance; to absolve an offender, which amounts to
an acquittal and remission of his punishment.
Halifax was absolved by a majority of fourteen. Macaulay.

2. To free from a penalty; to pardon; to remit (a sin); -- said of
the sin or guilt.
In his name I absolve your perjury. Gibbon.

3. To finish; to accomplish. [Obs.]
The work begun, how soon absolved. Milton.

4. To resolve or explain. [Obs.] "We shall not absolve the doubt."
Sir T. Browne.

Syn.
 -- To Absolve, Exonerate, Acquit. We speak of a man as absolved from
something that binds his conscience, or involves the charge of
wrongdoing; as, to absolve from allegiance or from the obligation of
an oath, or a promise. We speak of a person as exonerated, when he is
released from some burden which had rested upon him; as, to exonerate
from suspicion, to exonerate from blame or odium. It implies a purely
moral acquittal. We speak of a person as acquitted, when a decision
has been made in his favor with reference to a specific charge,
either by a jury or by disinterested persons; as, he was acquitted of
all participation in the crime.

ABSOLVENT
Ab*solv"ent, a. Etym: [L. absolvens, p. pr. of absolvere.]

Defn: Absolving. [R.] Carlyle.

ABSOLVENT
Ab*solv"ent, n.

Defn: An absolver. [R.] Hobbes.

ABSOLVER
Ab*solv"er, n.

Defn: One who absolves. Macaulay.

ABSONANT
Ab"so*nant, a. Etym: [L. ab + sonans, p. pr. of sonare to sound.]

Defn: Discordant; contrary; -- opposed to consonant. "Absonant to
nature." Quarles.

ABSONOUS
Ab"so*nous, a. Etym: [L. absonus; ab + sonus sound.]

Defn: Discordant; inharmonious; incongruous. [Obs.] "Absonous to our
reason." Glanvill.

ABSORB
Ab*sorb", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Absorbed; p. pr. & vb. n. Absorbing.]
Etym: [L. absorbere; ab + sorbere to suck in, akin to Gr. absorber.]

1. To swallow up; to engulf; to overwhelm; to cause to disappear as
if by swallowing up; to use up; to include. "Dark oblivion soon
absorbs them all." Cowper.
The large cities absorb the wealth and fashion. W. Irving.

2. To suck up; to drink in; to imbibe; as a sponge or as the lacteals
of the body. Bacon.

3. To engross or engage wholly; to occupy fully; as, absorbed in
study or the pursuit of wealth.

4. To take up by cohesive, chemical, or any molecular action, as when
charcoal absorbs gases. So heat, light, and electricity are absorbed
or taken up in the substances into which they pass. Nichol. p. 8

Syn.
 -- To Absorb, Engross, Swallow up, Engulf. These words agree in one
general idea, that of completely taking up. They are chiefly used in
a figurative sense and may be distinguished by a reference to their
etymology. We speak of a person as absorbed (lit., drawn in,
swallowed up) in study or some other employment of the highest
interest. We speak of a person as ebgrossed (lit., seized upon in the
gross, or wholly) by something which occupies his whole time and
thoughts, as the acquisition of wealth, or the attainment of honor.
We speak of a person (under a stronger image) as swallowed up and
lost in that which completely occupies his thoughts and feelings, as
in grief at the death of a friend, or in the multiplied cares of
life. We speak of a person as engulfed in that which (like a gulf)
takes in all his hopes and interests; as, engulfed in misery, ruin,
etc.
That grave question which had begun to absorb the Christian mind --
the marriage of the clergy. Milman.
Too long hath love engrossed Britannia's stage, And sunk to softness
all our tragic rage. Tickell.
Should not the sad occasion swallow up My other cares Addison.
And in destruction's river Engulf and swallow those. Sir P. Sidney.

ABSORBABILITY
Ab*sorb`a*bil"i*ty, n.

Defn: The state or quality of being absorbable. Graham (Chemistry).

ABSORBABLE
Ab*sorb"a*ble, a. Etym: [Cf. F. absorbable.]

Defn: Capable of being absorbed or swallowed up. Kerr.

ABSORBEDLY
Ab*sorb"ed*ly, adv.

Defn: In a manner as if wholly engrossed or engaged.

ABSORBENCY
Ab*sorb"en*cy, n.

Defn: Absorptiveness.

ABSORBENT
Ab*sorb"ent, a. Etym: [L. absorbens, p. pr. of absorbere.]

Defn: Absorbing; swallowing; absorptive. Absorbent ground (Paint.), a
ground prepared for a picture, chiefly with distemper, or water
colors, by which the oil is absorbed, and a brilliancy is imparted to
the colors.

ABSORBENT
Ab*sorb"ent, n.

1. Anything which absorbs.
The ocean, itself a bad absorbent of heat. Darwin.

2. (Med.)

Defn: Any substance which absorbs and neutralizes acid fluid in the
stomach and bowels, as magnesia, chalk, etc.; also a substance e. g.,
iodine) which acts on the absorbent vessels so as to reduce enlarged
and indurated parts.

3. pl. (Physiol.)

Defn: The vessels by which the processes of absorption are carried
on, as the lymphatics in animals, the extremities of the roots in
plants.

ABSORBER
Ab*sorb"er, n.

Defn: One who, or that which, absorbs.

ABSORBING
Ab*sorb"ing, a.

Defn: Swallowing, engrossing; as, an absorbing pursuit.
 -- Ab*sorb"ing, adv.

ABSORBITION
Ab`sor*bi"tion, n.

Defn: Absorption. [Obs.]

ABSORPT
Ab*sorpt`, a. Etym: [L. absorptus, p. p.]

Defn: Absorbed. [Arcahic.] "Absorpt in care." Pope.

ABSORPTION
Ab*sorp"tion, n. Etym: [L. absorptio, fr. absorbere. See Absorb.]

1. The act or process of absorbing or sucking in anything, or of
being absorbed and made to disappear; as, the absorption of bodies in
a whirlpool, the absorption of a smaller tribe into a larger.

2. (Chem. & Physics)

Defn: An imbibing or reception by molecular or chemical action; as,
the absorption of light, heat, electricity, etc.

3. (Physiol.)

Defn: In living organisms, the process by which the materials of
growth and nutrition are absorbed and conveyed to the tissues and
organs.

4. Entire engrossment or occupation of the mind; as, absorption in
some employment.

ABSORPTIVE
Ab*sorp"tive, a.

Defn: Having power, capacity, or tendency to absorb or imbibe. E.
Darwin.

ABSORPTIVENESS
Ab*sorp"tive*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being absorptive; absorptive power.

ABSORPTIVITY
Ab`sorp*tiv"i*ty, n.

Defn: Absorptiveness.

ABSQUATULATE
Ab*squat"u*late, v. i.

Defn: To take one's self off; to decamp. [A jocular word. U. S.]

ABSQUE HOC
Abs"que hoc

Defn: . Etym: [L., without this.] (Law) The technical words of denial
used in traversing what has been alleged, and is repeated.

ABSTAIN
Ab*stain", v. i. [imp. & p. p. Abstained; p. pr. & vb. n.
Abstaining.] Etym: [OE. absteynen, abstenen, OF. astenir, abstenir,
F. abstenir, fr. L. abstinere, abstentum, v. t. & v. i., to keep
from; ab, abs + tenere to hold. See Tenable.]

Defn: To hold one's self aloof; to forbear or refrain voluntarily,
and especially from an indulgence of the passions or appetites; --
with from.
Not a few abstained from voting. Macaulay.
Who abstains from meat that is not gaunt Shak.

Syn.
 -- To refrain; forbear; withhold; deny one's self; give up;
relinquish.

ABSTAIN
Ab*stain", v. t.

Defn: To hinder; to withhold.
Whether he abstain men from marrying. Milton.

ABSTAINER
Ab*stain"er, n.

Defn: One who abstains; esp., one who abstains from the use of
intoxicating liquors.

ABSTEMIOUS
Ab*ste"mi*ous, a. Etym: [L. abstemius; ab, abs + root of temetum
intoxicating drink.]

1. Abstaining from wine. [Orig. Latin sense.]
Under his special eye Abstemious I grew up and thrived amain. Milton.

2. Sparing in diet; refraining from a free use of food and strong
drinks; temperate; abstinent; sparing in the indulgence of the
appetite or passions.
Instances of longevity are chiefly among the abstemious. Arbuthnot.

3. Sparingly used; used with temperance or moderation; as, an
abstemious diet. Gibbon.

4. Marked by, or spent in, abstinence; as, an abstemious life. "One
abstemious day." Pope.

5. Promotive of abstemiousness. [R.]
Such is the virtue of the abstemious well. Dryden.

ABSTEMIOUSNESS
Ab*ste"mi*ous*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abstemious, temperate, or sparing in the
use of food and strong drinks. It expresses a greater degree of
abstinence than temperance.

ABSTENTION
Ab*sten"tion, a. Etym: [F. See Abstain.]

Defn: The act of abstaining; a holding aloof. Jer. Taylor.

ABSTENTIOUS
Ab*sten"tious, a.

Defn: Characterized by abstinence; self-restraining. Farrar.

ABSTERGE
Ab*sterge, v. t. Etym: [L. abstergere, abstersum; ab, abs + tergere
to wipe. Cf. F absterger.]

Defn: To make clean by wiping; to wipe away; to cleanse; hence, to
purge. [R.] Quincy.

ABSTERGENT
Ab*ster"gent, a. Etym: [L. abstergens, p. pr. of abstergere.]

Defn: Serving to cleanse, detergent.

ABSTERGENT
Ab*ster"gent, n.

Defn: A substance used in cleansing; a detergent; as, soap is an
abstergent.

ABSTERSE
Ab*sterse", v. t.

Defn: To absterge; to cleanse; to purge away. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

ABSTERSION
Ab*ster"sion, n. Etym: [F. abstersion. See Absterge.]

Defn: Act of wiping clean; a cleansing; a purging.
The task of ablution and abstersion being performed. Sir W. Scott.

ABSTERSIVE
Ab*ster"sive, a. Etym: [Cf. F. abstersif. See Absterge.]

Defn: Cleansing; purging. Bacon.

ABSTERSIVE
Ab*ster"sive, n.

Defn: Something cleansing.
The strong abstersive of some heroic magistrate. Milton.

ABSTERSIVENESS
Ab*ster"sive*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abstersive. Fuller.

ABSTINENCE
Ab"sti*nence, n. Etym: [F. abstinence, L. abstinentia, fr. abstinere.
See Abstain.]

1. The act or practice of abstaining; voluntary forbearance of any
action, especially the refraining from an indulgence of appetite, or
from customary gratifications of animal or sensual propensities.
Specifically, the practice of abstaining from intoxicating beverages,
-- called also total abstinence.
The abstinence from a present pleasure that offers itself is a pain,
nay, oftentimes, a very great one. Locke.

2. The practice of self-denial by depriving one's self of certain
kinds of food or drink, especially of meat.
Penance, fasts, and abstinence, To punish bodies for the soul's
offense. Dryden.

ABSTINENCY
Ab"sti*nen*cy, n.

Defn: Abstinence. [R.]

ABSTINENT
Ab"sti*nent, a. Etym: [F. abstinent, L. abstinens, p. pr. of
abstinere. See Abstain.]

Defn: Refraining from indulgence, especially from the indulgence of
appetite; abstemious; continent; temperate. Beau. & Fl.

ABSTINENT
Ab"sti*nent, n.

1. One who abstains.

2. (Eccl. Hist.)

Defn: One of a sect who appeared in France and Spain in the 3d
century.

ABSTINENTLY
Ab"sti*nent*ly, adv.

Defn: With abstinence.

ABSTORTED
Ab*stort"ed, a. Etym: [As if fr. abstort, fr. L. ab, abs + tortus, p.
p. of torquere to twist.]

Defn: Wrested away. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABSTRACT
Ab"stract` (#; 277), a. Etym: [L. abstractus, p. p. of abstrahere to
draw from, separate; ab, abs + trahere to draw. See Trace.]

1. Withdraw; separate. [Obs.]
The more abstract . . . we are from the body. Norris.

2. Considered apart from any application to a particular object;
separated from matter; exiting in the mind only; as, abstract truth,
abstract numbers. Hence: ideal; abstruse; difficult.

3. (Logic)
(a) Expressing a particular property of an object viewed apart from
the other properties which constitute it; -- opposed to Ant:
concrete; as, honesty is an abstract word. J. S. Mill.
(b) Resulting from the mental faculty of abstraction; general as
opposed to particular; as, "reptile" is an abstract or general name.
Locke.
A concrete name is a name which stands for a thing; an abstract name
which stands for an attribute of a thing. A practice has grown up in
more modern times, which, if not introduced by Locke, has gained
currency from his example, of applying the expression "abstract name"
to all names which are the result of abstraction and generalization,
and consequently to all general names, instead of confining it to the
names of attributes. J. S. Mill.

4. Abstracted; absent in mind. "Abstract, as in a trance." Milton. An
abstract idea (Metaph.), an idea separated from a complex object, or
from other ideas which naturally accompany it; as the solidity of
marble when contemplated apart from its color or figure.
 -- Abstract terms, those which express abstract ideas, as beauty,
whiteness, roundness, without regarding any object in which they
exist; or abstract terms are the names of orders, genera or species
of things, in which there is a combination of similar qualities.
 -- Abstract numbers (Math.), numbers used without application to
things, as 6, 8, 10; but when applied to any thing, as 6 feet, 10
men, they become concrete.
 -- Abstract or Pure mathematics. See Mathematics.

ABSTRACT
Ab*stract", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abstracted; p. pr. & vb. n.
Abstracting.] Etym: [See Abstract, a.]

1. To withdraw; to separate; to take away.
He was incapable of forming any opinion or resolution abstracted from
his own prejudices. Sir W. Scott.

2. To draw off in respect to interest or attention; as, his was
wholly abstracted by other objects.
The young stranger had been abstracted and silent. Blackw. Mag.

3. To separate, as ideas, by the operation of the mind; to consider
by itself; to contemplate separately, as a quality or attribute.
Whately.

4. To epitomize; to abridge. Franklin.

5. To take secretly or dishonestly; to purloin; as, to abstract goods
from a parcel, or money from a till.
Von Rosen had quietly abstracted the bearing-reins from the harness.
W. Black.

6. (Chem.)

Defn: To separate, as the more volatile or soluble parts of a
substance, by distillation or other chemical processes. In this sense
extract is now more generally used.

ABSTRACT
Ab*stract", v. t.

Defn: To perform the process of abstraction. [R.]
I own myself able to abstract in one sense. Berkeley.

ABSTRACT
Ab"stract`, n. Etym: [See Abstract, a.]

1. That which comprises or concentrates in itself the essential
qualities of a larger thing or of several things. Specifically: A
summary or an epitome, as of a treatise or book, or of a statement; a
brief.
An abstract of every treatise he had read. Watts.
Man, the abstract Of all perfection, which the workmanship Of Heaven
hath modeled. Ford.

2. A state of separation from other things; as, to consider a subject
in the abstract, or apart from other associated things.

3. An abstract term.
The concretes "father" and "son" have, or might have, the abstracts
"paternity" and "filiety." J. S. Mill.

4. (Med.)

Defn: A powdered solid extract of a vegetable substance mixed with
sugar of milk in such proportion that one part of the abstract
represents two parts of the original substance. Abstract of title
(Law), an epitome of the evidences of ownership.

Syn.
 -- Abridgment; compendium; epitome; synopsis. See Abridgment.

ABSTRACTED
Ab*stract"ed, a.

1. Separated or disconnected; withdrawn; removed; apart.
The evil abstracted stood from his own evil. Milton.

2. Separated from matter; abstract; ideal. [Obs.]

3. Abstract; abstruse; difficult. [Obs.] Johnson.

4. Inattentive to surrounding objects; absent in mind. "An abstracted
scholar." Johnson.

ABSTRACTEDLY
Ab*stract"ed*ly, adv.

Defn: In an abstracted manner; separately; with absence of mind.

ABSTRACTEDNESS
Ab*stract"ed*ness, n.

Defn: The state of being abstracted; abstract character.

ABSTRACTER
Ab*stract"er, n.

Defn: One who abstracts, or makes an abstract.

ABSTRACTION
Ab*strac"tion, n. Etym: [Cf. F. abstraction. See Abstract, a.]

1. The act of abstracting, separating, or withdrawing, or the state
of being withdrawn; withdrawal.
A wrongful abstraction of wealth from certain members of the
community. J. S. Mill.

2. (Metaph.)

Defn: The act process of leaving out of consideration one or more
properties of a complex object so as to attend to others; analysis.
Thus, when the mind considers the form of a tree by itself, or the
color of the leaves as separate from their size or figure, the act is
called abstraction. So, also, when it considers whiteness, softness,
virtue, existence, as separate from any particular objects.

Note: Abstraction is necessary to classification, by which things are
arranged in genera and species. We separate in idea the qualities of
certain objects, which are of the same kind, from others which are
different, in each, and arrange the objects having the same
properties in a class, or collected body.
Abstraction is no positive act: it is simply the negative of
attention. Sir W. Hamilton.

3. An idea or notion of an abstract, or theoretical nature; as, to
fight for mere abstractions.

4. A separation from worldly objects; a recluse life; as, a hermit's
abstraction.

5. Absence or absorption of mind; inattention to present objects.

6. The taking surreptitiously for one's own use part of the property
of another; purloining. [Modern]

7. (Chem.)

Defn: A separation of volatile parts by the act of distillation.
Nicholson.

ABSTRACTIONAL
Ab*strac"tion*al, a.

Defn: Pertaining to abstraction.

ABSTRACTIONIST
Ab*strac"tion*ist, n.

Defn: An idealist. Emerson.

ABSTRACTITIOUS
Ab`strac*ti"tious, a.

Defn: Obtained from plants by distillation. [Obs.] Crabb.

ABSTRACTIVE
Ab*strac"tive, a. Etym: [Cf. F. abstractif.]

Defn: Having the power of abstracting; of an abstracting nature. "The
abstractive faculty." I. Taylor.

ABSTRACTIVELY
Ab*strac"tive*ly, adv.

Defn: In a abstract manner; separately; in or by itself. Feltham.

ABSTRACTIVENESS
Ab*strac"tive*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abstractive; abstractive property.

ABSTRACTLY
Ab"stract`ly (#; 277), adv.

Defn: In an abstract state or manner; separately; absolutely; by
itself; as, matter abstractly considered.

ABSTRACTNESS
Ab"stract`ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abstract. "The abstractness of the ideas."
Locke.

ABSTRINGE
Ab*stringe", v. t. Etym: [L ab + stringere, strictum, to press
together.]

Defn: To unbind. [Obs.] Bailey.

ABSTRUDE
Ab*strude", v. t. Etym: [L. abstrudere. See Abstruse.]

Defn: To thrust away. [Obs.] Johnson.

ABSTRUSE
Ab*struse", a. Etym: [L. abstrusus, p. p. of abstrudere to thrust
away, conceal; ab, abs + trudere to thrust; cf. F. abstrus. See
Threat.]

1. Concealed or hidden out of the way. [Obs.]
The eternal eye whose sight discerns Abstrusest thoughts. Milton.

2. Remote from apprehension; difficult to be comprehended or
understood; recondite; as, abstruse learning.
Profound and abstruse topics. Milman.

ABSTRUSELY
Ab*struse"ly, adv.

Defn: In an abstruse manner.

ABSTRUSENESS
Ab*struse"ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abstruse; difficulty of apprehension.
Boyle.

ABSTRUSION
Ab*stru"sion, n. Etym: [L. abstrusio. See Abstruse.]

Defn: The act of thrusting away. [R.] Ogilvie.

ABSTRUSITY
Ab*stru"si*ty, n.

Defn: Abstruseness; that which is abstruse. [R.] Sir T. Browne.

ABSUME
Ab*sume", v. t. Etym: [L. absumere, absumptum; ab + sumere to take.]

Defn: To consume gradually; to waste away. [Obs.] Boyle.

ABSUMPTION
Ab*sump"tion (#; 215), n. Etym: [L. absumptio. See Absume.]

Defn: Act of wasting away; a consuming; extinction. [Obs.] Sir T.
Browne.

ABSURD
Ab*surd", a. Etym: [L. absurdus harsh-sounding; ab + (prob) a
derivative fr. a root svar to sound; not connected with surd: cf. F.
absurde. See Syringe.]

Defn: Contrary to reason or propriety; obviously and fiatly opposed
to manifest truth; inconsistent with the plain dictates of common
sense; logically contradictory; nonsensical; ridiculous; as, an
absurd person, an absurd opinion; an absurd dream.
This proffer is absurd and reasonless. Shak.
'This phrase absurd to call a villain great. Pope.
p. 9

Syn.
 -- Foolish; irrational; ridiculous; preposterous; inconsistent;
incongruous.
 -- Absurd, Irrational, Foolish, Preposterous. Of these terms,
irrational is the weakest, denoting that which is plainly
inconsistent with the dictates of sound reason; as, an irrational
course of life. Foolish rises higher, and implies either a perversion
of that faculty, or an absolute weakness or fatuity of mind; as,
foolish enterprises. Absurd rises still higher, denoting that which
is plainly opposed to received notions of propriety and truth; as, an
absurd man, project, opinion, story, argument, etc. Preposterous
rises still higher, and supposes an absolute inversion in the order
of things; or, in plain terms, a "putting of the cart before the
horse;" as, a preposterous suggestion, preposterous conduct, a
preposterous regulation or law.

ABSURD
Ab*surd", n.

Defn: An absurdity. [Obs.] Pope.

ABSURDITY
Ab*surd"i*ty, n.; pl. Absurdities. Etym: [L. absurditas: cf. F.
absurdite.]

1. The quality of being absurd or inconsistent with obvious truth,
reason, or sound judgment. "The absurdity of the actual idea of an
infinite number." Locke.

2. That which is absurd; an absurd action; a logical contradiction.
His travels were full of absurdities. Johnson.

ABSURDLY
Ab*surd"ly, adv.

Defn: In an absurd manner.

ABSURDNESS
Ab*surd"ness, n.

Defn: Absurdity. [R.]

ABUNA
A*bu"na, n. Etym: [Eth. and Ar., our father.]

Defn: The Patriarch, or head of the Abyssinian Church.

ABUNDANCE
A*bun"dance, n. Etym: [OE. (h)abudaunce, abundance, F. abundance, F.
abondance, L. abundantia, fr. abundare. See Abound.]

Defn: An overflowing fullness; ample sufficiency; great plenty;
profusion; copious supply; superfluity; wealth: -- strictly
applicable to quantity only, but sometimes used of number.
It is lamentable to remember what abundance of noble blood hath been
shed with small benefit to the Christian state. Raleigh.

Syn.
 -- Exuberance; plenteousness; plenty; copiousness; overflow; riches;
affluence; wealth.
 -- Abundance, Plenty, Exuberance. These words rise upon each other
in expressing the idea of fullness. Plenty denotes a sufficiency to
supply every want; as, plenty of food, plenty of money, etc.
Abundance express more, and gives the idea of superfluity or excess;
as, abundance of riches, an abundance of wit and humor; often,
however, it only denotes plenty in a high degree. Exuberance rises
still higher, and implies a bursting forth on every side, producing
great superfluity or redundance; as, an exuberance of mirth, an
exuberance of animal spirits, etc.

ABUNDANT
A*bun"dant, a. Etym: [OE. (h)abundant, aboundant, F. abondant, fr. L.
abudans, p. pr. of abundare. See Abound.]

Defn: Fully sufficient; plentiful; in copious supply; -- followed by
in, rarely by with. "Abundant in goodness and truth." Exod. xxxiv. 6.
Abundant number (Math.), a number, the sum of whose aliquot parts
exceeds the number itself. Thus, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, the aliquot parts of
12, make the number 16. This is opposed to a deficient number, as 14,
whose aliquot parts are 1, 2, 7, the sum of which is 10; and to a
perfect number, which is equal to the sum of its aliquot parts, as 6,
whose aliquot parts are 1, 2., 3.

Syn.
 -- Ample; plentiful; copious; plenteous; exuberant; overflowing;
rich; teeming; profuse; bountiful; liberal. See Ample.

ABUNDANTLY
A*bun"dant*ly, adv.

Defn: In a sufficient degree; fully; amply; plentifully; in large
measure.

ABURST
A*burst", adv. Etym: [Pref. a- + burst.]

Defn: In a bursting condition.

ABUSABLE
A*bus"a*ble, a.

Defn: That may be abused.

ABUSAGE
A*bus"age, n.

Defn: Abuse. [Obs.] Whately (1634).

ABUSE
A*buse", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Abused; p. pr. & vb. n. Abusing.] Etym:
[F. abuser; L. abusus, p. p. of abuti to abuse, misuse; ab + uti to
use. See Use.]

1. To put to a wrong use; to misapply; to misuse; to put to a bad
use; to use for a wrong purpose or end; to pervert; as, to abuse
inherited gold; to make an excessive use of; as, to abuse one's
authority.
This principle (if one may so abuse the word) shoots rapidly into
popularity. Froude.

2. To use ill; to maltreat; to act injuriously to; to punish or to
tax excessively; to hurt; as, to abuse prisoners, to abuse one's
powers, one's patience.

3. To revile; to reproach coarsely; to disparage.
The . . . tellers of news abused the general. Macaulay.

4. To dishonor. "Shall flight abuse your name" Shak.

5. To violate; to ravish. Spenser.

6. To deceive; to impose on. [Obs.]
Their eyes red and staring, cozened with a moist cloud, and abused by
a double object. Jer. Taylor.

Syn.
 -- To maltreat; injure; revile; reproach; vilify; vituperate;
asperse; traduce; malign.

ABUSE
A*buse", n. Etym: [F. abus, L. abusus, fr. abuti. See Abuse, v. t.]

1. Improper treatment or use; application to a wrong or bad purpose;
misuse; as, an abuse of our natural powers; an abuse of civil rights,
or of privileges or advantages; an abuse of language.
Liberty may be endangered by the abuses of liberty, as well as by the
abuses of power. Madison.

2. Physical ill treatment; injury. "Rejoice . . . at the abuse of
Falstaff." Shak.

3. A corrupt practice or custom; offense; crime; fault; as, the
abuses in the civil service.
Abuse after disappeared without a struggle.. Macaulay.

4. Vituperative words; coarse, insulting speech; abusive language;
virulent condemnation; reviling.
The two parties, after exchanging a good deal of abuse, came to
blows. Macaulay.

5. Violation; rape; as, abuse of a female child. [Obs.]
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing Shak.
Abuse of distress (Law), a wrongful using of an animal or chattel
distrained, by the distrainer.

Syn.
 -- Invective; contumely; reproach; scurrility; insult; opprobrium.
 -- Abuse, Invective. Abuse is generally prompted by anger, and
vented in harsh and unseemly words. It is more personal and coarse
than invective. Abuse generally takes place in private quarrels;
invective in writing or public discussions. Invective may be conveyed
in refined language and dictated by indignation against what is
blameworthy. C. J. Smith.

ABUSEFUL
A*buse"ful, a.

Defn: Full of abuse; abusive. [R.] "Abuseful names." Bp. Barlow.

ABUSER
A*bus"er, n.

Defn: One who abuses [in the various senses of the verb].

ABUSION
A*bu"sion, n. Etym: [OE. abusion, abusioun, OF. abusion, fr. L.
abusio misuse of words, f. abuti. See Abuse, v. t.]

Defn: Evil or corrupt usage; abuse; wrong; reproach; deception;
cheat. Chaucer.

ABUSIVE
A*bu"sive, a. Etym: [Cf. F. abusif, fr. L. abusivus.]

1. Wrongly used; perverted; misapplied.
I am . . . necessitated to use the word Parliament improperly,
according to the abusive acceptation thereof. Fuller.

2. Given to misusing; also, full of abuses. [Archaic] "The abusive
prerogatives of his see." Hallam.

3. Practicing abuse; prone to ill treat by coarse, insulting words or
by other ill usage; as, an abusive author; an abusive fellow.

4. Containing abuse, or serving as the instrument of abuse;
vituperative; reproachful; scurrilous. "An abusive lampoon." Johnson.

5. Tending to deceive; fraudulent; cheating. [Obs.] "An abusive
treaty." Bacon.

Syn.
 -- Reproachful; scurrilous; opprobrious; insolent; insulting;
injurious; offensive; reviling.

ABUSIVELY
A*bu"sive*ly, adv.

Defn: In an abusive manner; rudely; with abusive language.

ABUSIVENESS
A*bu"sive*ness, n.

Defn: The quality of being abusive; rudeness of language, or violence
to the person.
Pick out mirth, like stones out of thy ground, Profaneness,
filthiness, abusiveness. Herbert.

ABUT
A*but", v. i. [imp. & p. p. Abutted; p. pr. & vb. n. Abutting.] Etym:
[OF. abouter, aboter; cf. F. aboutir, and also abuter; a (L. ad) +
OF. boter, buter, to push: cf. F. bout end, and but end, purpose.]

Defn: To project; to terminate or border; to be contiguous; to meet;
-- with on, upon, or against; as, his land abuts on the road.

ABUTILON
A*bu"ti*lon, n. Etym: [Ar. aubutilun.] (Bot.)

Defn: A genus of malvaceous plants of many species, found in the
torrid and temperate zones of both continents; -- called also Indian
mallow.

ABUTMENT
A*but"ment, n.

1. State of abutting.

2. That on or against which a body abuts or presses; as
(a) (Arch.) The solid part of a pier or wall, etc., which receives
the thrust or lateral pressure of an arch, vault, or strut. Gwilt.
(b) (mech.) A fixed point or surface from which resistance or
reaction is obtained, as the cylinder head of a steam engine, the
fulcrum of a lever, etc.
(c) In breech-loading firearms, the block behind the barrel which
receives the pressure due to recoil.

ABUTTAL
A*but"tal, n.

Defn: The butting or boundary of land, particularly at the end; a
headland. Spelman.

ABUTTER
A*but"ter, n.

Defn: One who, or that which, abuts. Specifically, the owner of a
contiguous estate; as, the abutters on a street or a river.

ABUZZ
A*buzz", a. Etym: [Pref. a- + buzz.]

Defn: In a buzz; buzzing. [Colloq.] Dickens.

ABY; ABYE
A*by", A*bye", v. t. & i. [imp. & p. p. Abought.] Etym: [AS. abycgan
to pay for; pref. a- (cf. Goth. us-, Ger. er-, orig. meaning out) +
bycgan to buy. See Buy, and cf. Abide.]

1. To pay for; to suffer for; to atone for; to make amends for; to
give satisfaction. [Obs.]
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. Shak.

2. To endure; to abide. [Obs.]
But nought that wanteth rest can long aby. Spenser.

ABYSM
A*bysm", n. Etym: [OF. abisme; F. abime, LL. abyssimus, a superl. of
L. abyssus; Gr. Abyss.]

Defn: An abyss; a gulf. "The abysm of hell." Shak.

ABYSMAL
A*bys"mal, a.

Defn: Pertaining to, or resembling, an abyss; bottomless; unending;
profound.
Geology gives one the same abysmal extent of time that astronomy does
of space. Carlyle.

ABYSMALLY
A*bys"mal*ly, adv.

Defn: To a fathomless depth; profoundly. "Abysmally ignorant." G.
Eliot.

ABYSS
A*byss", n. Etym: [L. abyssus a bottomless gulf, fr. Gr.

1. A bottomless or unfathomed depth, gulf, or chasm; hence, any deep,
immeasurable, and, specifically, hell, or the bottomless pit.
Ye powers and spirits of this nethermost abyss. Milton.
The throne is darkness, in the abyss of light. Dryden.

2. Infinite time; a vast intellectual or moral depth.
The abysses of metaphysical theology. Macaulay.
In unfathomable abysses of disgrace. Burke.

3. (Her.)

Defn: The center of an escutcheon.

Note: This word, in its leading uses, is associated with the
cosmological notions of the Hebrews, having reference to a supposed
illimitable mass of waters from which our earth sprung, and beneath
whose profound depths the wicked were punished. Encyc. Brit.

ABYSSAL
A*byss"al, a. Etym: [Cf. Abysmal.]

Defn: Belonging to, or resembling, an abyss; unfathomable. Abyssal
zone (Phys. Geog.), one of the belts or zones into which Sir E.
Forbes divides the bottom of the sea in describing its plants,
animals, etc. It is the one furthest from the shore, embracing all
beyond one hundred fathoms deep. Hence, abyssal animals, plants, etc.

ABYSSINIAN
Ab`ys*sin"i*an, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to Abyssinia. Abyssinian gold, an alloy of
90.74 parts of copper and 8.33 parts of zink. Ure.

ABYSSINIAN
Ab`ys*sin"i*an, n.

1. A native of Abyssinia.

2. A member of the Abyssinian Church.

ACACIA
A*ca"ci*a, n. (Antiq.)

Defn: A roll or bag, filled with dust, borne by Byzantine emperors,
as a memento of mortality. It is represented on medals.

ACACIA
A*ca"cia, n.; pl. E. Acacias, L. Acaciæ. Etym: [L. from Gr. ak to be
sharp. See Acute.]

1. A genus of leguminous trees and shrubs. Nearly 300 species are
Australian or Polynesian, and have terete or vertically compressed
leaf stalks, instead of the bipinnate leaves of the much fewer
species of America, Africa, etc. Very few are found in temperate
climates.

2. (Med.)

Defn: The inspissated juice of several species of acacia; -- called
also gum acacia, and gum arabic.

ACACIN; ACACINE
Ac"a*cin, Ac"a*cine, n.

Defn: Gum arabic.

ACADEME
Ac`a*deme", n. Etym: [L. academia. See Academy.]

Defn: An academy. [Poetic] Shak.

ACADEMIAL
Ac`a*de"mi*al, a.

Defn: Academic. [R.]

ACADEMIAN
Ac`a*de"mi*an, n.

Defn: A member of an academy, university, or college.

ACADEMIC
Ac`a*dem"ic, n.

1. One holding the philosophy of Socrates and Plato; a Platonist.
Hume.

2. A member of an academy, college, or university; an academician.

ACADEMIC; ACADEMICAL
Ac`a*dem"ic, Ac`a*dem"ic*al, a. Etym: [L. academicus: cf. F.
académigue. See Academy.]

1. Belonging to the school or philosophy of Plato; as, the Academic
sect or philosophy.

2. Belonging to an academy or other higher institution of learning;
scholarly; literary or classical, in distinction from scientific.
"Academic courses." Warburton. "Academical study." Berkeley.

ACADEMICALLY
Ac`a*dem`ic*al*ly, adv.

Defn: In an academical manner.

ACADEMICALS
Ac`a*dem"ic*als, n. pl.

Defn: The articles of dress prescribed and worn at some colleges and
universities.

ACADEMICIAN
Ac`a*de*mi"cian (#; 277), n. Etym: [F. académicien. See Academy.]

1. A member of an academy, or society for promoting science, art, or
literature, as of the French Academy, or the Royal Academy of arts.

2. A collegian. [R.] Chesterfield.

ACADEMICISM
Ac`a*dem"i*cism, n.

1. A tenet of the Academic philosophy.

2. A mannerism or mode peculiar to an academy.

ACADEMISM
A*cad"e*mism, n.

Defn: The doctrines of the Academic philosophy. [Obs.] Baxter.

ACADEMIST
A*cad"e*mist, n. Etym: [F. academiste.]

1. An Academic philosopher.

2. An academician. [Obs.] Ray.

ACADEMY
A*cad"e*my, n.; pl. Academies. Etym: [F. académie, L. academia. Cf.
Academe.]

1. A garden or grove near Athens (so named from the hero Academus),
where Plato and his followers held their philosophical conferences;
hence, the school of philosophy of which Plato was head.

2. An institution for the study of higher learning; a college or a
university. Popularly, a school, or seminary of learning, holding a
rank between a college and a common school.

3. A place of training; a school. "Academies of fanaticism." Hume.

4. A society of learned men united for the advancement of the arts
and sciences, and literature, or some particular art or science; as,
the French Academy; the American Academy of Arts and Sciences;
academies of literature and philology.

5. A school or place of training in which some special art is taught;
as, the military academy at West Point; a riding academy; the Academy
of Music. Academy figure (Paint.), a drawing usually half life-size,
in crayon or pencil, after a nude model.

ACADIAN
A*ca"di*an, a.

Defn: Of or pertaining to Acadie, or Nova Scotia. "Acadian farmers."
Longfellow.
 -- n.

Defn: A native of Acadie. Acadian epoch (Geol.), an epoch at the
beginning of the American paleozoic time, and including the oldest
American rocks known to be fossiliferous. See Geology.
 -- Acadian owl (Zoöl.), a small North American owl (Nyctule
Acadica); the saw-whet.

ACAJOU
Ac"a*jou, n. Etym: [F. See Cashew.] (Bot.)
(a) The cashew tree; also, its fruit. See Cashew.
(b) The mahogany tree; also, its timber.

ACALEPH; ACALEPHAN
Ac"a*leph, Ac`a*le"phan n.; pl. Acalephs, Acalephans. Etym: [See
Acalephæ.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: One of the Acalephæ.

ACALEPHAE
Ac`a*le"phæ, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr.

Defn: A group of Coelenterata, including the Medusæ or jellyfishes,
and hydroids; -- so called from the stinging power they possess.
Sometimes called sea nettles.

ACALEPHOID
Ac`ale"phoid, a. Etym: [Acaleph + -oid.] (Zoöl.)

Defn: Belonging to or resembling the Acalephæ or jellyfishes.

ACALYCINE; ACALYSINOUS
A*cal"y*cine, Ac`a*lys`i*nous, a. Etym: [Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Without a calyx, or outer floral envelope.

ACANTH
A*canth", n.

Defn: Same as Acanthus.

ACANTHA
A*can"tha, n. Etym: [Gr. Acute.]

1. (Bot.)

Defn: A prickle.

2. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A spine or prickly fin.

3. (Anat.)

Defn: The vertebral column; the spinous process of a vertebra.
Dunglison.

ACANTHACEOUS
Ac"an*tha"ceous, a.

1. Armed with prickles, as a plant.

2. (Bot.)

Defn: Of, pertaining to, or resembling, the family of plants of which
the acanthus is the type.

ACANTHINE
A*can"thine, a. Etym: [L. acanthinus, Gr. Acanthus.]

Defn: Of, pertaining to, or resembling, the plant acanthus.

ACANTHOCARPOUS
A*can`tho*car"pous, a. Etym: [Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Having the fruit covered with spines.

ACANTHOCEPHALA
A*can`tho*ceph"a*la, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A group of intestinal worms, having the proboscis armed with
recurved spines.

ACANTHOCEPHALOUS
A*can`tho*ceph"a*lous, a. (Zoöl.)

Defn: Having a spiny head, as one of the Acanthocephala.

ACANTHOPHOROUS
Ac`an*thoph"o*rous, a. Etym: [Gr.

Defn: Spine-bearing. Gray.

ACANTHOPODIOUS
A*can`tho*po"di*ous, a. Etym: [Gr. (Bot.)

Defn: Having spinous petioles.

ACANTHOPTERI
Ac`an*thop"ter*i, n. pl. Etym: [NL., from Gr. (Zoöl.)

Defn: A group of teleostean fishes having spiny fins. See
Acanthopterygii.
